Improvements In Food Resources
Solution 01:

Micronutrients
(i) They are required in very small quantities.
(ii) They are involved in enzyme activity and electron transport.
Example – Iron, Zinc

Macronutrients
(i) They are required in large quantities.
(ii) They have no significant role in enzyme activity and electron transport.
Example – Nitrogen, Calcium

Solution 02:

Source: (i) Air –
Nutrients:
Carbon (C)
Oxygen (O)
Hydrogen (H)

Source: (ii) Water
Nutrients:
Nitrogen (N)
Phosphorus (P)
Potassium (K)
Calcium (Ca)
Magnesium (Mg)

Source: (iii) Soil
Nutrients:
Iron (Fe)
Manganese (Mn)
Boron (B)
Zinc (Zn)
Copper (Cu)
Molybdenum (Mo)
Chlorine (Cl)
Sulphur (S)



Solution 03: Plants get nutrients through air, water and soil.

Solution 04: Nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.

Solution 05:
Iron – Micronutrients.
Chlorine – Micronutrients.
Sulphur – Macronutrients.
Copper – Micronutrients.
Nitrogen- Macronutrients.
Calcium- Macronutrients.
Manganese- Micronutrients.
Potassium- Macronutrients.
Zinc- Micronutrients.
Magnesium- Macronutrients.
Molybdenum- Micronutrients.
Phosphorus- Macronutrients.

Solution 06:
Advantages of manures are:
(i) Manures are natural fertilizers.
(ii) Manures are bulky sources of organic matter which supply nutrients in small quantity and
organic matter in large quantities.

Solution 07:
Limitations of using manures are:
(i) Manures are not nutrient specific.
(ii) Manures are not able to fulfill the high and rapid demand of nutrients required by improved
high-yielding hybrid varieties of crops.

Solution 08;
Manure contains many organic substances of biological origin which can be easily degraded and
absorbed by plants. It helps in recycling of biological waste. Manures increase the fertility of soil
for long duration without causing any harm. However, the chemical fertilizers (e.g. urea)
improve soil fertility for short duration but cause environmental hazard. Continuous use of
fertilizers in a particular area / crop field causes destruction of soil fertility.

Solution 09:
Advantages of fertilizer over manure:
(i) Fertilizers are very rich in plant nutrient whereas manure contains small amounts of essential
plant nutrients.
(ii) Fertilizers are soluble in water whereas manure is not soluble in water.



Solution 10:
As a result of this, the pond water would acquire a high concentration of nitrates and
phosphates which would result in the excessive growth of algae and phytoplankton in the pond.

Solution 11:
Eutrophication is a process whereby water bodies, such as lakes or slow-moving streams
receive excess nutrients that stimulate excessive plant growth (algae, phytoplankton’s and
nuisance plants weeds). This enhanced plant growth is also termed as an algal bloom.
Example: During rains the nutrients from the fields are washed away and get accumulated in
nearby water bodies.

Solution 12:
The continuous use of chemical fertilizers in a particular area or crop field leads to loss of soil
fertility.

Solution 13:
There are three methods of fertilizer applications in practice:
(i) Broadcasting: Uniform distribution over the whole cropped field.
(ii) Placement: Application in bands or in pockets near the plants or plant rows.
(iii) Foliar application: Using low or high volume sprayers, the fertilizers are sprayed covering
the plants.

Solution 14:
Farmyard Manure : It is the decomposed mixture of cattle excreta, dung, urine, litter and left
over organism matter such as roughage and Fodder.

Compost Manure : It is prepared from farm and town refuge such as vegetable and animal
refuse.

Solution 15:

Manure – Manures are natural fertilizers. They are bulky sources of organic matter which
supply nutrients in small quantities, and organic matter in large quantities. There are different
types of manures: Farmyard manure (FYM), Compost, Green manures and Vermicompost.
Manures affect the soil in following three ways:

(i) Manures enrich the soil with nutrients. They replenish the general deficiency of nutrients in
the soil. Since manure contains fewer nutrients they need to be used in large quantities.

(ii) Manures add organic matter (called humus) to the soil which restores the soil texture, for
better retention of water and aeration of soil.

(iii) The organic matter in manures provides food for the soil organisms, (decomposers such as
bacteria, fungi, etc. which help in providing nutrients to plants.



Solution 16:
Green manuring is the practice which includes growing, mulching by ploughing and mixing of
green crops with soil, to improve physical structure and soil fertility.
Example – Sunn hemp (Crotalaria juncea).

Solution 17:
Fertilizers – Fertilizers are one of the major components for obtaining higher yields especially in
expensive farming practices. Fertilizers are divided into following four groups:

(i) Nitrogenous fertilizers – These fertilizers supply the macronutrient nitrogen.
Example – Urea, CO(NH2)2

(ii) Potassic fertilizers – These fertilizers supply potassium which is one of the essential
macronutrient of the plants.
Example – Potassium sulphate, K2SO4.

(iii) Complex fertilizers – These fertilizers contains two or more nutrients.
Example – Nitrophosphate

Solution 18:
Biofertilisers – Organisms which enrich the soil with nutrients are called biofertilisers.
Biofertilisers are used for the specific crop plants such as pulses, legumes, oil seeds and rice.
They are renewable and non-pollutant sources of plant nutrient such as nitrogen.
Nitrogen fixing microorganisms, i.e., non-symbiotic and symbiotic cyanobacteria and
phosphate-solubilising microorganism are the main type of biofertilisers.

Solution 19:
A legume crop does not require nitrogenous fertilizers because its roots have root nodules
which have nitrogenous bacteria called Rhizobium. This bacteria fixes atmospheric nitrogen and
the plants converts nitrogen into various nitrogenous compounds.

Solution 20:
Irrigation is essential for the absorption of nutrient elements by the crop plants from the soil.
The irrigation water tends to dissolve the nutrients present in the soil of a crop field to form a
Solution. This Solution of nutrients is then absorbed by the roots of crops for the development
of the plants.

Solution 21:
Excessive irrigation causes water logging and increases surface salinity which leads to soil
salinity.

Solution 22:
Effects of excessive irrigation:
(i) It causes water logging.



(ii) It increases salinity in the soil.
(iii) The roots do not get proper aeration due to which they die.

Solution 23:
Water should be used judiciously because:
(i) It helps in the cultivation of crops.
(ii) In desert areas where there is scarcity of water, it is supplied through irrigation practices to
prevent drought.

Solution 24:
Advantages of irrigation:
(i) It is necessary to provide sufficient moisture for the germination of seeds.
(ii) Irrigation of crop plants is essential for the growth and elongation of roots of the crop
plants.
(iii) It is necessary to increase the number of aerial branches in crop plants.
(iv)It is essential for the absorption of nutrient elements by the crop plants from the soil.

Solution 25:
The efficiency of irrigation can be increased by:
(i) Drip and sprinkler system – It increases the efficiency of irrigation as it sprays water through
pipes and a sprinkler.
(ii) River lift system – It is useful in those areas where canal flow is insufficient or irregular due
to inadequate water release. The water is directly drawn from the rivers for supplement
irrigation.

Solution 26:
There are two main factors responsible for loss of grains during storage:
(i) Biotic factors – Insects, rodents, birds, mites and bacteria.
(ii) Abiotic factors – They include moisture, temperature and other non-living environmental
factors.

Solution 27:
Biotic and abiotic factors which cause destruction of grains during storage can be prevented by
the following methods:

(i) Drying – The harvested food grains should be dried by spreading them over plastic sheets or
cemented floors. All the sun dried food grains are allowed to cool to room temperature before
storing them.

(ii) Cleaning – The grains should be properly cleaned before storage. They should be filled in
new gunny bags before keeping in godowns, warehouses or stores.

Solution 28:
Drying – The harvested food grains is dried by spreading them over plastic sheets or cemented



floors. All the sun dried food grains are then allowed to cool to room temperature before
storing them.

Solution 29:
For the storage of grains, grain silos are used. The silos are big and tall cylindrical structures.
They are provided with outlets at different levels to withdraw the desired stock of grains. They
have built in arrangement for aeration, temperature control, protection from insects, rats, birds
etc.

Solution 30:
Field crops are infested with a variety of pests. There are various methods by which insects and
diseases can be controlled. One of the most common and effective methods is the use of
pesticides or biocides which include insecticides (for killing the insects), weedicides (for killing
the weeds) and fungicides (for killing the fungi). Thus chemicals used to kill the pests, e.g.
weeds; insects, mites, rodents and fungi are called pesticides. These chemicals are sprayed on
crop plants or used for treating seeds and soil.

Solution 31:
During the grain storage, if the loss is due to the biotic factors which includes insects, rodents,
birds, mites, fungi and bacteria, then it shows the presence of pests in the grain stores.

Solution 32:
Spraying:
(i) Spraying requires mechanical devices such as manual sprayer or mechanical sprayer.
(ii) It is less effective than fumigation.
Fumigation:
(i) It does not require any mechanical device.
(ii) It is more effective than spraying.

Solution 33;
Milk is rich in fat, tocopherol, proteins, calcium, and phosphorus and contains low sodium,
potassium and cholesterol. It is ideal for making milk products like ghee, curd etc. Milk in
comparison to other food products such as egg and meat contain all the major food
constituents such as carbohydrates, proteins, fats, minerals, water and vitamins such as A and
D.

Solution 34:
The animals which provide us food are cow, buffalo, hen and fish.

Solution 35:
Animal products used as food are: Milk, egg, meat, honey.



Solution 36:

Roughage:
(i) Roughage contains fibres such as green fodder, silage, hay and legumes.
(ii) It is high in fibre.

Concentrates:
(i) Concentrates are a mixture of substances which are rich in one or more nutrients.
(ii) It is low in fibre.

Solution 37:

The daily average feed of a cow is given below:
(i) Green fodder and dry grasses (roughage) = 15 to 20 Kg.
(ii) Grain mixture (Concentrates) = 4 to 5 Kg.
(iii) Water = 30 to 35 litres.

Solution 38:
The sources of concentrates are cotton seeds, oil seeds, grains of maize, oats, barley, jowar,
bajra, gram and their by products such as wheat bran, rice bran, gram husk, oil seed cakes and
molasses.

PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page N0: 64

Solution 39:

(i) The shelters should have roofed sheds which protects them from rain, heat, direct sunlight
and cold.

(ii) The floor of cattle shed is made brick-lined and sloping for faciliating cleaning and keeping
their sitting place dry.

(iii) The sheds or shelters should be provided with cross ventilation with sufficient number of
inlets and outlets.

(iv) The shelters are provided with feeding passage and feeding trough.

Solution 40:
Artificial insemination; It generally gives improved breeds. This method is widely used to
improve the qualities of cow, buffaloes, poultry, horse, sheep, goats and pigs. This method is
economical, reliable and hygienic.



Solution 41:

(a) Cows are classified as draught, diary and dual purpose breeds.
(i) Draught breeds – Their meat is tough and gives little milk. They are used in agricultural
practices.
(ii) Diary breeds – They have large digestive systems and gives large amount of milk.
(iii) Dual breeds – These breeds provide milk as well as help in agricultural tasks.

(b) Breeds of buffaloes – There are ten breeds of buffalo in our country. The important breeds
of buffalo with high yield of milk are – Murrah, Mehsana and Surti.

Solution 42:

Steps involved in artificial insemination are:
(i) The semen of healthy and tough animal of high milk yielding breed is collected.
(ii) It is preserved by freezing or chemical methods.
(iii) The preserved semen is then injected into the genital tract of the female animal.
(iv) The preserved semen is injected during fertility period.

Solution 43:
Artificial insemination is the process of injecting the semen obtained from a desired male bull of
high milk yielding breed into the genital or reproductive tract of female animal during heat
period.

Advantages:
(i) It is economical because semen from a single bull can be used to impregnate several
thousand cows.
(ii) It gives high rate of successful fertilization.

Solution 44:

Symptoms of sick animals:
(i) Fever
(ii) Constipation followed by severe diarrhea.
(iii) Restlessness
(iv) Irritation

Solution 45:
(a) Symptoms of Mastitis: Fever, udder becomes swollen, milk is watery.
(b) Symptoms of Foot-and-mouth: Blisters appear on the mouth and foot resulting in extreme
soreness of the parts. Loss of appetite, excessive salivation, high fever accompanied by
shivering and inability to work.



Solution 46:

The high yielding breeds of poultry are advantageous over indigenous breeds as:
(i) Improved quality and quantity of chicks.
(ii) Low maintenance requirement.
(iii) Improvement in egg production and reduction in the size of the layer.
(iv) Tolerance to high temperature.

Solution 47:
Advantages of fishery:
(i) Economically important desired fishes are raised in a small area.
(ii) Fishes are made to breed in different seasons.
(iii) There is little mortality in the younger stages of the fishes.
(iv) Through selective hybridization, yield and quality of fishes are improved.

Solution 48:
Poultry diseases can be prevented by giving good management practices. The growers require
enough space as overcrowding tends to suppress their growth. Adequate lighting should be
there. They should be provided with proper feed. Clean and hygienic conditions are must to
keep them in good health and prevent them from diseases.

Solution 49:
Bee keeping is the rearing of honey bees which provide us with useful products such as honey,
wax, propolis, royal jelly and bee venom.

Solution 50 :
Composite fish culture is advantageous and economical. It yields about 8-9 times more
production than monoculture. All the species of fish live in distinct zone inside the pond and
have distinct feeding habits.

Solution SAQ – 1:
Plants as food are gift of nature to humans and most animals. Different parts of plants, such as
root, stem, leaf, flower and fruit are consumed by humans in the form of cereals, vegetables,
spices and fruits. Animals produce milk, egg, meat, etc. which also supplement our food
requirements.

Solution SAQ – 2:
Green revolution is the high production of food grains. The objectives of crop improvement are:
(i) Crop production management.
(ii) Crop variety improvement.
(iii) Crop protection management.



Solution SAQ – 3:

The cereals provide us with carbohydrates. The pulses provide us with proteins. Fruits and
vegetables give us carbohydrates, protein, fat, vitamins, minerals and lots of fibers.

Solution SAQ – 4:
The basic objective of mixed cropping is to minimize the risk and insure against the crop failure
due to abnormal conditions.

Criteria for the selection of crops for mixed cropping:
(i) The different crops to be grown together are so selected that the products and waste
materials from one crop stimulates the growth of the other crop.
(ii) Care is taken to select crops that do not compete with each other for light, nutrients and
water.

Solution SAQ – 5 :
Mixed Cropping:
(i) It aims to minimize the risk of crop failure.
(ii) Seeds of two crops are mixed before sowing.
(iii) It involves no set pattern of rows of crops.
Intercropping:
(i) It aims to increase the productivity per unit area.
(ii) Seeds of two crops are not mixed.
(iii) It involves set pattern of rows of crops.

Solution SAQ – 6:
Advantages of mixed cropping:
(i) The risk of total crop failure due to uncertain monsoon is reduced.
(ii) Chances of pest infestation are greatly reduced.
(iii) Fertility of the soil is improved by growing two crops simultaneously.
Disadvantages of mixed cropping:
(i) Seeds of two crops are mixed before sowing and there is no definite pattern for sowing the
seeds.
(ii) Products of different crops are harvested, threshed, marketed and consumed in mixed form.

Solution SAQ – 7:
Intercropping is the practice of growing two or more crops simultaneously in a same field in
definite row patterns with the objective of increasing productivity per unit area.
Mixed Cropping:
(i) It aims to minimize the risk of crop failure.
(ii) Seeds of two crops are mixed before sowing.
(iii) It involves no set pattern of rows of crops.
Intercropping:
(i) It aims to increase the productivity per unit area.



(ii) Seeds of two crops are not mixed.
(iii) It involves set pattern of rows of crops.

Solution SAQ – 8:
Disadvantages of crop rotation: Crops of the same family should not be repeatedly grown in the
same field. This practice will promote build up of diseases and insect pests and decrease the
similar nutrients from the soil.

Solution SAQ – 9:
Criteria for the selection of crops for crop rotation:
(i) Availability of moisture through rain or irrigation.
(ii) Status of nutrients in the soil.
(iii) Duration of crop – short or long.

Solution SAQ – 10:
Leguminous crops are required in crop rotation as they are used to increase the soil fertility.
Those crops which require high fertility level may be grown after growing legumes. They also
replenish the soil with nitrogen content.

Solution SAQ – 11:
The three steps involved in hybridization are:
(i) Introduction – This refers to the transportation of crop plants from the place of cultivation to
the place where they were grown earlier.
(ii) Selection – This process involves the selection of most desirable offspring of a variety of
plant for controlled propagation.
(iii) Hybridisation – It involves the crossing between genetically dissimilar plants to produce a
new kind. Crossing may be between two different varieties (intervarietal cross – breeding) or
between the two different species of the same genus (inter specific cross – breeding) and
between different genera (intergeneric cross – breeding).

Solution SAQ – 12:
Plant breeding means production of new varieties or strains by a programme of artificial
selection spanning several generations of the organism concerned.
It involves hybridization and mutation breeding.

(i) Hybridisation – It involves the crossing between genetically dissimilar plants to produce a
new kind. Crossing may be between two different varieties (intervarietal cross – breeding) or
between the two different species of the same genus (inter specific cross – breeding) and
between different genera (intergeneric cross – breeding).

(ii) Mutation breeding – The breeding that takes place through various mutagens.



Solution SAQ – 13:
Biological method of weed control involves the deliberate use of insects or some other
organisms which consume and specifically destroy the weed plants.
Example – Opuntia can be controlled by using cochineal insects in Maharashtra.

Solution SAQ – 14:
Plant disease Occurrence Transmission
(i) Blast Rice Air-borne
(ii) Rust Wheat Air-borne
(iii) Wilt Chick pea Soil-borne
(iv) Stem rot Pigeon pea Water-borne
(v) White rust Rice Mustard Air-borne

Solution SAQ – 15:
The ways by which the insects attack the crop plants are:
(i) The chewing insects destroy all sorts of crop plants. They cut the root, stem and leaf of the
crop plants by the help of their chewing mouth parts.
(ii) Sucking insects suck the cell sap from various parts of the plant. They make fine punctures in
the skin of plants with their needle – like, hollow beaks and suck the sap.
(iii) The internal feeders live inside the plant parts. They make holes in the developing grains.

Solution SAQ – 16:
Controlling insect pests:

(i) Root cutting type of insects is controlled by mixing insecticides in the soil.
Example – Chloropyriphos.

(ii) Stem and leaf cutting type of insects can be controlled by dusting or spraying the contact
insecticides.
Example – Malathion, lindane and thiodan.

(iii) All sap sucking insects can be controlled by spraying systematic insecticides.
Example – Dimethoate and metasystox.

Solution SAQ – 17:
(a) Example of narrow leaved rabi season weeds are – Cyperus rotundas and Wild sorghum.
(b) Example of broad leaved kharif season weeds are – Amaranthus viridis and Trianthema.

Solution SAQ – 18:
The various methods of weed control are:
(i) Mechanical methods – These include uprooting, weeding with trowel or khurpi, hand hoeing,
interculture, ploughing, burning and flooding.
(ii) Cultural methods – This includes the proper bed preparation, timely sowing of crops,
intercropping and crop rotation.



(iii) Chemical methods – Herbicides and weedicides are sprayed on weeds to destroy weeds like
– 2, 4 – D.
(iv) Biological methods – Biological method of weed control involves the deliberate use of
insects or some other organisms which consume and specifically destroy the weed plants.
Example – Opuntia can be controlled by using cochineal insects in Maharashtra.

Solution SAQ – 19:
Effect of weeds on crop plants:
(i) The growth of weeds in the crop fields is harmful because they compete with the crops for
nutrients, water, space and light.
(ii) The weeds spread crop pests and diseases by acting as alternate host to insects and
microorganisms.
(iii) Some weeds may produce toxic substances which may interfere with the growth of crop
plants.
(iv) During harvesting weeds get mixed with crop’s produce to downgrade its quality.

Solution SAQ – 20:
Crop’s pest is any destructive organism which causes great economic loss by destroying crop
plants or products obtained from them.
These can be controlled by the use of pesticides or biocides which includes insecticides,
weedicides and fungicides. These chemicals are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating
seeds and soil.

Solution SAQ – 21:
Insect resistant varieties are advantageous as they do not get infested with pests. Their genes
are modified so pests cannot harm them. Therefore, pesticides are not used to protect them
diseases which are toxic in nature and cause environmental pollution.



 Motion

Question 1:
Is displacement a scalar quantity ?
Solution :
No, displacement is a vector quantity.

Question 2:
State whether distance is a scalar or a vector quantity.
Solution :
Distance is a scalar quantity.

Question 3:
Change the speed of 6 m/s into km/h.
Solution :
6 m/s
= 6 x (3600/1000) km/hr = 21.6km/hr

Question 4:
What name is given to the speed in a specified direction ?
Solution :
Speed of a body in a specified direction is called velocity.

Question 5:
Give two examples of bodies having non-uniform motion.
Solution :
(a) Motion of a bus on a road
(b) Motion of a racing horse

Question 6:
Name the physical quantity obtained by dividing ‘Distance travelled’ by ‘Time taken’ to travel
that distance.

Solution :
Speed is defined as the distance travelled per unit time.

Question 7:
What do the following measure in a car ?
(a) Speedometer (b) Odometer
Solution :
(a)The speedometer of a car measures instantaneous speed of the car.
(b)Odometer is a device used to record the distance travelled by the car.



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:20

Question 8:
Name the physical quantity which gives us an idea of how slow or fast a body is moving.
Solution :
Speed gives an idea of how slow or fast a body is moving.

Question 9:
Under what conditions can a body travel a certain distance and yet its resultant displacement
be zero ?
Solution :
When the body comes back to its starting point, it has zero resultant displacement but covers
a certain non-zero distance.

Question 10:
In addition to speed, what else should we know to predict the position of a moving body ?
Solution :
In addition to speed, we should know the direction in which the body is moving.

Question 11:
When is a body said to have uniform velocity ?
Solution :
When a body covers equal distances in equal intervals of time in a particular direction however
small or big the time interval may be, the object is said to have uniform velocity.

Question 12:
Under which condition is the magnitude of average velocity equal to average speed ?
Solution :
When the object moves in a single straight line, t he magnitude of average velocity equal to
average speed.

Question 13:
Which of the two can be :zero under certain conditions : average speed of a moving body or
average velocity of a moving body ?
Solution :
Average velocity of a moving body can be zero.

Question 14:
Give one example of a situation in which a body has a certain average speed but its average
velocity is zero.
Solution :
Motion of a boy from his home to shop (in one direction) and back to home (in its reverse



direction) is an example of a situation in which a body has a certain average speed but its
average velocity is zero.

Question 15:
What is the acceleration of a body moving with uniform velocity ?
Solution :
When a body is moving with uniform velocity, its acceleration is zero.

Question 16:
What is the other name of negative acceleration ?
Solution :
Negative acceleration is also called retardation.

Question 17:
Name the physical quantity whose SI unit is :
(a) m/s (b) m/s2

Solution :
(a) Speed (or Velocity)
(b) Acceleration

Question 18:
What type of motion is exhibited by a freely falling body ?
Solution :
Uniformly accelerated motion

Question 19:
What is the SI unit of retardation ?
Solution :
S.I. unit of retardation is m/s2.

Question 20:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Displacement is a…………………… quantity whereas distance is a………………………….
(b) The physical quantity which gives both, the speed and direction of motion of a body is
called its………………………..
(c) A motorcycle has a steady……………. of 3 m/s2. This means that every………………. its……………..
increases by………….
(d) Velocity is the rate of change of……………………… It is measured in .
(e) Acceleration is the rate of change of………………. It is measured in
Solution :
(a) vector, scalar
(b) velocity
(c) acceleration, second, velocity, 3m/s
(d) displacement, m/s
(e) velocity, m/s2

Question 21:
What type of motion, uniform or non-uniform, is exhibited by a freely falling body ? Give reason
for your answer.
Solution :
A freely falling body has non-uniform motion because it covers smaller distances in the initial
‘1 second’ intervals and larger distances in the later ‘1 second’ intervals, i.e., it covers unequal



distances in equal intervals of time.

Question 22:
State whether speed is a scalar or a vector quantity. Give reason for your choice.
Solution :
Speed is a scalar quantity as it has magnitude only, it has no specified direction.

Question 23:
Bus X travels a distance of 360 km in 5 hours whereas bus Y travels a distance of 476 km in 7
hours. Which
bus travels faster ?
Solution :
For bus X,
Speed= Distance/Time
Speed=360/5=72km/h
For bus Y,
Speed= Distance/Time
Speed=476/7=68 km/h
Speed of bus X is more than that of bus Y. Hence, bus X travels faster.

Question 24:
Arrange the following speeds in increasing order (keeping the least speed first):

1. An athlete running with a speed of 10 m/s.
2. A bicycle moving with a speed of 200 m/min.
3. A scooter moving with a speed of 30 km/h.

Solution :
Speed of athelete = 10 m/s
Speed of bicycle = 200 m/min = 200/60 m/s = 3.33 m/s
Speed of scooter = 30 km/h = 30000/3600 m/s = 8.33 m/s
3.33 m/s < 8.33 m/s < 10 m/s
i.e. 200 m/min < 30 km/h < 10 m/s

Question 25:
(a) Write the formula for acceleration. Give the meaning of each symbol which occurs in it.
(b) A train starting from Railway Station attains a speed of 21 m/s in one minute. Find its
acceleration.
Solution :

Question 26:
(a) What term is used to denote the change of velocity with time ?
(b) Give one word which means the same as ‘moving with a negative acceleration’.



(c) The displacement of a moving object in a given interval of time is zero. Would the distance
travelled by the object also be zero ? Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
(a) Acceleration
(b) Retardation
(c) No, because if a body takes a round trip such that its final position is same as the starting
position, then the displacement of the body is zero but the distance travelled is non-zero.

Question 27:
A snail covers a distance of 100 metres in 50 hours. Calculate the average speed of snail in
km/h.

Solution :
Average speed = Total distance travelled/ Total time taken
Total distance travelled = 100m = 0.1 km; Total time taken = 50 hr
Average speed= 0.1/50=0.002km/h

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:21

Question 28:
A tortoise moves a distance of 100 metres in 15 minutes. What is the average speed of
tortoise in km/h ?
Solution :
Total distance=100m =0.1 km
Total time taken=15 minutes= 15/60=0.25 hour
Average speed = Total distance travelled/ Total time taken
=0.1/0.25= 0.4km/h

Question 29:
If a sprinter runs a distance of 100 metres in 9.83 seconds, calculate his average speed in
km/h.
Solution :
Total distance travelled =100m
Total time taken = 9.83 sec
Average speed = Total distance travelled/ Total time taken
=100/9.83 =10.172m/s
Averge speed in km/h:
10.172 x(3600/1000)=36.62 km/h

Question 30:
A motorcyclist drives from place A to B with a uniform speed of 30 km h-1 and returns from
place B to A with a uniform speed of 20 km h-1. Find his average speed.
Solution :



Question 31:
A motorcyclist starts from rest and reaches a speed of 6 m/s after travelling with uniform
acceleration for 3 s. What is his acceleration ?
Solution :
Initial velocity= 0m/s
Final velocity=6m/s
Time=3 sec

Question 32:
An aircraft travelling at 600 km/h accelerates steadily at 10 km/h per second. Taking the
speed of sound as 1100 km/h at the aircraft’s altitude, how long will it take to reach the ‘sound
barrier’ ?
Solution :
Initial velocity, u = 600 km/h
Final velocity, v = 1100 km/h
Acceleration = 10 km/h/s = 600 km/h2

From relation, a = (v-u)/t
t = (v-u)/a
t = (1100-600)/600 = 500/600 = 5/6 hr = 50 sec

Question 33:
If a bus travelling at 20 m/s is subjected to a steady deceleration of 5 m/s2, how long will it
take to come to rest ?
Solution :
Deceleration, a=-5m/s2

Initial velocity, u=20m/s
Final velocity, v=0m/s
t=?



Question 34:
(a) What is the difference between ‘distance travelled’ by a body and its ‘displacement’ ?
Explain with the
help of a diagram.
(b) An ant travels a distance of 8 cm from P to Q and then moves a distance of 6 cm at right
angles to PQ. Find its resultant displacement.
Solution :
(a) Distance travelled is the actual length of the indirect path covered by the body whereas
displacement refers to the straight line path between the initial and final positions. For e.g. In
the figure given below, a body moves from point A to point B and then from point B to point C.
Here, the distance travelled by the body is AB + BC and displacement is AC.

Question 35:
Define motion. What do you understand by the terms ‘uniform motion’ and ‘non-uniform
motion’ ? Explain with examples.
(a) Define speed. What is the SI unit of speed ?
(b) What is meant by (i) average speed, and (ii) uniform speed ?
Solution :
A body is said to be in motion when its position changes continuously with respect to a
stationary object taken as reference point.
A body has uniform motion if it travels equal distances in equal intervals of time, no matter
how small these time intervals may be. For example: a car running at a constant speed of
10m/s, will cover equal distance of 10m every second, so its motion will be uniform.
Non-uniform motion: A body has a non-uniform motion if it travels unequal distances in equal
intervals of time. For example: dropping a ball from the roof of a tall building .

Question 36:
(a) Define velocity. What is the SI unit of velocity ?
(b) What is the difference between speed and velocity ?



(c) Convert a speed of 54 km/h into m/s.
Solution :
(a) Speed of a body is the distance travelled by it per unit time. The SI unit of speed is m/s.
(b) (i) Average speed of a body is the total distance travelled divided by the total time taken to
cover this distance.
(ii) Uniform speed refers to the constant speed of a moving body. A body has a uniform speed
if it travels equal distance in equal intervals of time, no matter how small these time intervals
may be.

Question 37:
(a) What is meant by the term ‘acceleration’ ? State the SI unit of acceleration.
(b) Define the term ‘uniform acceleration’. Give one example of a uniformly accelerated motion.
Solution :
(a) Velocity of a body is the distance travelled by it per unit time in a given direction. SI unit of
velocity is m/s.
( b)(i)Speed is a scalar quantity whereas velocity is a vector quantity.
(ii) Speed of a body is distance travelled by it per unit time whereas velocity of a body is the
distance travelled by it per unit time in a given direction.
(iii)Speed is always positive whereas velocity can be both positive as well as negative.
(c) Speed = 54km/h = 54 x (1000/3600) = 15m/s

Question 38:
The distance between Delhi and Agra is 200 km. A train travels the first 100 km at a speed of
50 km/h. How fast must the train travel the next 100 km, so as to average 70 km/h for the
whole journey ?
Solution :
(a) Acceleration of a body is defined as the rate of change of its velocity with time. SI unit of
acceleration is m/s2.
(b) A body has uniform acceleration if it travels in a straight line and its velocity increases by
equal amounts in equal intervals of time. For example: Motion of a freely falling body.

Question 39:
A train travels the first 15 km at a uniform speed of 30 km/h; the next 75 km at a uniform
speed of 50 km/h; and the last 10 km at a uniform speed of 20 km/h. Calculate the average
speed for the entire train journey.
Solution :



Question 40:
A train travels the first 15 km at a uniform speed of 30 km/h; the next 75 km at a uniform
speed of 50 km/h; and the last 10 km at a uniform speed of 20 km/h. Calculate the average
speed for the entire train journey.
Solution :

Question 41:
A car is moving along a straight road at a steady speed. It travels 150 m in 5 seconds :
(a) What is its average speed ?
(b) How far does it travel in 1 second ?
(c) How far does it travel in 6 seconds ?
(d) How long does it take to travel 240 m ?
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:22

Question 55:
A body is moving along a circular path of radius R. What will be the distance travelled and
displacement of the body when it completes half a revolution ?
Solution :
Distance travelled in half a rotation of a circular path is equal to the circumference of semi-
circle, i.e.,

Question 56:
If on a round trip you travel 6 km and then arrive back home :
(a) What distance have you travelled ?
(b) What is your final displacement ?
Solution :
(i) Distance travelled = 6 km
(ii) Displacement = zero(since final position is same as initial position)

Question 57:
A body travels a distance of 3 km towards East, then 4 km towards North and finally 9 km
towards East.
(i) What is the total distance travelled ?
(ii) What is the resultant displacement ?
Solution :
(i) Total distance travelled= 3 + 4 +9=16 km
(ii) The body travels a total distance of 12 km in east direction i.e. towards x-axis.
And it travels a distance of 4 km in North direction, i.e. towards y-axis. Hence, resultant
displacement is

Question 58:
A boy walks from his classroom to the bookshop along a straight corridor towards North. He
covers a distance of 20 m in 25 seconds to reach the bookshop. After buying a book, he
travels the same distance in the same time to reach back in the classroom. Find (a) average
speed, and (b) average velocity, of the boy.
Solution :
(a) Total distance covered in going to the bookshop and coming back to the classroom = 20 +
20 = 40m
Total time taken= 25 + 25 = 50 sec



Question 59:
A car travels 100 km at a speed of 60 km/h and returns with a speed of 40 km/h. Calculate the
average speed for the whole journey.
Solution :
In the first case, car travels at a speed of 60 km/h for a distance of 100 km
In the second case, car travels at a speed of 40 km/h for a distance of 100 km
Total distance travelled = 200 km

Question 60:
A ball hits a wall horizontally at 6.0 m s-1. It rebounds horizontally at 4.4 m s -1. The ball is in
contact with the wall for 0.040 s. What is the acceleration of the ball ?
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=6m/s
Final velocity ,v=-4.4m/s(the ball rebounds in opposite direction)
Time, t = 0.040 s

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:39

Question 1:
(a) What remains constant in uniform circular motion ?
(b) What changes continuously in uniform circular motion ? ‘
Solution :
(a)Speed
(b)Direction of motion



Question 2:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Earth moves round the sun with uniform velocity.
Solution :
No, earth moves round the sun with uniform speed, but its velocity changes continuously.

Question 3:
A body goes round the sun with constant speed in a circular orbit. Is the motion uniform or
accelerated ?
Solution :
The motion is accelerated.

Question 4:
What conclusion can you draw about the velocity of a body from the displacement-time graph
shown below :

Solution :
It represents uniform velocity.

Question 5:
Name the quantity which is measured by the area occupied under the velocity-time graph.
Solution :
Distance travelled by the moving body .

Question 6:
What does the slope of a speed-time graph indicate ?
Solution :
The slope of a speed-time graph indicates acceleration.

Question 7:
What does the slope of a distance-time graph indicate ?
Solution :
The slope of a distance-time graph indicates speed.

Question 8:
Give one example of a motion where an object does not change its speed but its direction of
motion changes continuously.
Solution :
Motion of moon around the earth.

Question 9:
Name the type of motion in which a body has a constant speed but not constant velocity.
Solution :
Uniform circular motion.

Question 10:



What can you say about the motion of a body if its speed-time graph is a straight line parallel
to the time axis ?
Solution :
The Speed of the body is constant or uniform.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:40

Question 11:
What conclusion can you draw about the speed of a body from the following distance-time
graph ?

Solution :
The body has uniform speed.

Question 12:
What can you say about the motion of a body whose distance-time graph is a straight line
parallel to the time axis ?
Solution :
The body is not moving. It is stationary.

Question 13:
What conclusion can you draw about the acceleration of a body from the speed-time graph
shown below ?

Solution :
It represents non-uniform acceleration.

Question 14:
A satellite goes round the earth in a circular orbit with constant speed. Is the motion uniform or
accelerated ?



Solution :
It is accelerated motion as the velocity is changing continuously.

Question 15:
What type of motion is represented by the tip of the ‘seconds’ hand’ of a watch ? Is it uniform
or accelerated ?
Solution :
The tip of the ‘seconds’ hand’ of a watch represents uniform circular motion. It is an
accelerated motion.

Question 16:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) If a body moves with uniform velocity, its acceleration is…………………………..
(b) The slope of a distance-time graph indicates………………….. of a moving body.
(c) The slope of a speed-time graph of a moving body gives its………………………..
(d) In a speed-time graph, the area enclosed by the speed-time curve and the time axis gives
the…………….. by the body.
(e) It is possible for something to accelerate but not change its speed if it moves in
a………………………..
Solution :
(a) zero
(b) speed
(c) acceleration
(d) distance travelled
(e) circular path

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:41

Question 17:
Is the uniform circular motion accelerated ? Give reasons for your answer
Solution :
Yes, uniform circular motion is accelerated because the velocity changes due to continuous
change in the direction of motion.

Question 18:
Write the formula to calculate the speed of a body moving along a circular path. Give the
meaning of each symbol which occurs in it.



Solution :
The speed of a body moving along a circular path is given by the formula:
where, v= speed
=3.14 ( it is a constant)
r = radius of circular path
t= time taken for one round of circular path

Question 19:
Explain why, the motion of a body which is moving with constant speed in a circular path is
said to be accelerated.
Solution :
The motion of a body which is moving with constant speed in a circular path is said to be
accelerated because its velocity changes continuously due to the continuous change in the
direction of motion.

Question 20:
What is the difference between uniform linear motion and uniform circular motion ? Explain
with examples.
Solution :
Uniform linear motion is uniform motion along a linear path or a straight line. T he direction of
motion is fixed. So, it is not accelerated. For e.g.: a car running with uniform speed of 10km/hr
on a straight road.
Uniform circular motion is uniform motion along a circular path. T he direction of motion
changes continuously. So, it is accelerated. For e.g.: motion of earth around the sun.

Question 21:
State an important characteristic of uniform circular motion. Name the force which brings
about uniform circular motion.
Solution :
An important characteristic of uniform circular motion is that the direction of motion in it
changes continuously with time, so it is accelerated.
Centripetal force brings about uniform circular motion.

Question 22:
Find the initial velocity of a car which is stopped in 10 seconds by applying brakes. The
retardation due to brakes is 2.5 m/s2.
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=?
Final velocity, v=0m/s (car is stopped)
Retardation, a=-2.5 m/s2

Time, t=10s
v=u + at
0=u +(-2.5)x 10
u=25m/s

Question 23:
Describe the motion of a body which is accelerating at a constant rate of 10 m s –2. If the body



starts from rest, how much distance will it cover in 2 s ?
Solution :
The velocity of this body is increasing at a rate of ’10 metres per second’ every second.
Initial velocity, u=0m/s
Time, t=2s
Acceleration, a=10m/s2

Question 24:
A motorcycle moving with a speed of 5 m/s is subjected to an acceleration of 0.2 m/s 2.
Calculate the speed of the motorcycle after 10 seconds, and the distance travelled in this time.
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=5m/s
Final velocity, v=?
Acceleration, a=0.2m/s2

Time, t=10 sec
Using , v=u + at
v=5 + 0.2 x 10
v=5 + 2 =7 m/s
Now distance travelled in time is calculated;

Question 25:
A bus running at a speed of 18 km/h is stopped in 2.5 seconds by applying brakes. Calculate
the retardation produced.
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=18km/h
Final velocity, v=0m/s
Time, t=2.5 sec
Acceleration, a=?
Using , v= u + at

So, retardation is 2m/s2.



Question 26:
A train starting from rest moves with a uniform acceleration of 0.2 m/s 2 for 5 minutes.
Calculate the speed acquired and the distance travelled in this time.
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=0m/s
Final velocity, v=?
Acceleration, a=0.2 m/s2

Time, t=5min= 5 x60=300 sec
Using, v = u + at
v =0 + 0.2 x 300=60m/s
And the distance travelled is

Question 27:
Name the two quantities, the slope of whose graph gives :
(a) speed, and
(b) acceleration
Solution :
(a) Distance and Time
(b) Speed (or velocity) and Time

Question 28:
A cheetah starts from, rest, and accelerates at 2 m/s 2 for 10 seconds. Calculate :
(a) the final velocity
(b) the distance travelled.
Solution :
Initial velocity,
u=0m/s
Final velocity, v=?
Acceleration, a=2m/s2

Time, t=10s
(a)Using,
v = u + at
v=0 + 2 x 10= 20 m/s
(b)Distance travelled is:



Question 29:
A train travelling at 20 m s-1 accelerates at 0.5 m s -2 for 30 s. How far will it travel in this time ?
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=20m/s
Time, t=30 s
Acceleration,
a=0.5m/s2

Distance travelled is:

Question 30:
A cyclist is travelling at 15 m s-1. She applies brakes so that she does not collide with a wall 18
m away. What deceleration must she have ?
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=15m/s
Final velocity, v=0m/s
Distance, s=18m
Acceleration, a=?
So, deceleration is 6.25 m/s2.

Question 31:
Draw a velocity-time graph to show the following motion :
A car accelerates uniformly from rest for 5 s ; then it travels at a steady’ velocity for 5 s.
Solution :

Question 32:
The velocity-time graph for part of a train journey is a horizontal straight line. What does this
tell you about
(a) the train’s velocity, and (b) about its acceleration ?
Solution :
(a) The train has a uniform velocity.



(b) There is no acceleration.

Question 33:
(a) Explain the meaning of the following equation of motion :v = u + at, where symbols have
their usual meanings.
(b) A body starting from rest travels with uniform acceleration. If it travels 100 m in 5 s, what is
the value of acceleration ?
Solution :
(a) v=u + at is the first equation of motion. It gives the velocity acquired by a body in time t
when the body has initial velocity u and uniform acceleration a.
(b)Initial velocity, u=0m/s
Time, t=5 s
Distance, s=100m
Acceleration, a=?

Question 34:
(a) Derive the formula : v = u + at, where the symbols have usual meanings.
(b) A bus was moving with a speed of 54 km/h. On applying brakes it stopped in 8 seconds.
Calculate the acceleration.
Solution :
(a) Consider a body having initial velocity ‘u’. Suppose it is subjected to a uniform acceleration
‘a’ so that after time’t’ its final velocity becomes ‘v’. Now, from the definition of acceleration we
know that:
(b) Initial velocity, u=54km/h= 15m/s
Final velocity, v=0m/s
Time, t=8s
Acceleration, a=?

Question 35:

(a) Derive the formula : , where the symbols have usual meanings.



(b) A train starting from stationary position and moving with uniform acceleration attains a
speed of 36 km per hour in 10 minutes. Find its acceleration.
Solution :
(a) Suppose a body has an initial velocity ‘u’ and a uniform acceleration’ a’ for time ‘t’ so that its
final velocity becomes ‘v’. Let the distance travelled by the body in this time be ‘s’. The distance
travelled by a moving body in time ‘t’ can be found out by considering its average velocity.
Since the initial velocity of the body is ‘u’ and its final velocity is ‘v’, the average velocity is given
by:
(b) Initial velocity, u=0m/s
Final velocity, v=36km/h=10m/s
Time, t=10min =10 x 60=600 sec

Question 36:
(a) Write the three equations of uniformly accelerated motion. Give the meaning of each
symbol which occurs in them.
(b) A car acquires a velocity of 72 km per hour in 10 seconds starting from rest. Find
(i) the acceleration,
(ii) the average velocity, and
(iii) the distance travelled in this time.
Solution :



Question 37:
(a) What is meant by uniform circular motion ? Give two examples of uniform circular motion.
(b) The tip of seconds’ hand of a dock takes 60 seconds to move once on the circular dial of
the clock. If the radius of the dial of the clock be 10.5 cm, calculate the speed of the tip of the

seconds’ hand of the clock. (Given ).
Solution :
(a) When a body moves in a circular path with uniform speed (constant speed), its motion is
called uniform circular motion. For e.g.
(i) Artificial satellites move in uniform circular motion around the earth.
(ii) Motion of a cyclist on a circular track.
(b) The speed of a body moving along a circular path is given by the formula:
Given, t=60 sec
Radius, r=10.5cm=0.105 m

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:42

Question 38:
Show by means of graphical method that: v = u + at, where the symbols have their usual
meanings.
Solution :
Consider the velocity-time graph of a body shown in figure.
The body has an initial velocity u at a point A and then its velocity changes at a uniform rate
from A to B in time t. In other words, there is a uniform acceleration a from A to B, and after
time t its final velocity becomes v which is equal to BC in the graph. The time t is represented
by OC. To complete the figure, we draw the perpendicular CB from point C, and draw AD
parallel to OC. BE is the perpendicular from point B to OE.
Now, Initial velocity of the body, u= OA —–(1)
And,Final velocity of the body, v=BC ——(2)
But from the graph BC =BD + DC
Therefore, v=BD + DC ——(3)
Again DC = OA
So,v =BD + OA
Now, from equation (1), OA =u
So, v=BD + u ——(4)
We should find out the value of BD now. We know the slope of a velocity-time graph is equal to
the acceleration, a.
Thus,Acceleration, a= slope of line AB
or a = BD/AD
But AD =OC= t, so putting t in place of AD in the above relation, we get:
or BD=at
Now, putting this value of BD in equation(4), we get:
v= u+ at



Question 39:

Show by using the graphical method that:  where the symbols have their
usual meanings.
Solution :
Consider the velocity-time graph of a body shown in figure. The body has an initial velocity u at
a point A and then its velocity changes at a uniform rate from A to B in time t. In other words,
there is a uniform acceleration a from A to B, and after time t its final velocity becomes v
which is equal to BC in the graph. The time t is represented by OC.
Suppose the body travels a distance s in time t. In the figure, the distance travelled by the body
is given by the area of the space between the velocity-time graph AB and the time axis OC,
which is equal to the area of the figure OABC. Thus:
Distance travelled = Area of figure OABC
= Area of rectangle OADC + area of triangle ABD
Now, we will find out the area of rectangle OADC and area of triangle ABD.
(i) Area of rectangle OADC =OA x OC
= u x t
=ut
(ii) Area of triangle ABD= (1/2)x Area of rectangle AEBD
= (1/2) x AD x BD
= (1/2) x t x at
= 2

(1/2) at
Distance travelled, s = Area of rectangle OADC + area of triangle ABD



Question 40:
Derive the following equation of motion by the graphical method : v2 = u2 + 2as, where the
symbols have their usual meanings.
Solution :
Consider the velocity-time graph of a body shown in figure. The body has an initial velocity u at
a point A and then its velocity changes at a uniform rate from A to B in time t. In other words,
there is a uniform acceleration a from A to B, and after time t its final velocity becomes v
which is equal to BC in the graph. The time t is represented by OC. To complete the figure, we
draw the perpendicular CB from point C, and draw AD parallel to OC. BE is the perpendicular
from point B to OE.
The distance travelled s by a body in time t is given by the area of the figure OABC which is a
trapezium.
Distance travelled, s= Area of trapezium OABC
Now, OA + CB = u + v and OC =t Putting these values in the above relation, we get:
Eliminate t from the above equation. This can be done by obtaining the value of t from the first
equation of motion.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:43

Question 53:



The graph given alongside shows the positions of a body at different times. Calculate the
speed of the body as it moves from :
(i) A to B,
(ii) B to C, and
(iii) C to D.

Solution :
(i) The distance covered from A to B is( 3-0) =3 cm
Time taken to cover the distance from A to B =(5 -2) =3s
(ii) The speed of the body as it moves from B to C is zero.
(iii) The distance covered from C to D is (7-3)=4 cm
Time taken to cover the distance from C to D = (9-7)=2s

Question 54:
What can you say about the motion of a body if:
(a) its displacement-time graph is a straight line ?
(b) its velocity-time graph is a straight line ?
Solution :
(a) The body has a uniform velocity if its displacement-time graph is a straight line.
(b) The body has a uniform acceleration if its velocity-time graph is a straight line.

Question 55:
A body with an initial velocity x moves with a uniform acceleration y. Plot its velocity-time
graph.
Solution :



Question 56:
Given alongside is the velocity-time graph for a moving body :
Find :
(i) Velocity of the body at point C.
(ii) Acceleration acting on the body between A and
(iii) Acceleration acting on the body between B and C.

Solution :
(i) BC represents uniform velocity. From graph, we see that the velocity of the body at point C =
40km/h
(ii) Acceleration between A and B = slope of line AB
(iii) BC represents uniform velocity, so acceleration acting on the body between B and C is
zero.

Question 57:
A body is moving uniformly in a straight line with a velocity of 5 m/s. Find graphically the
distance covered by it in 5 seconds.
Solution :
Distance travelled = Area of rectangle OABC
= OA x OC
= 5 x 5 =25 m

Question 58:
The speed-time graph of an ascending passenger lift is given alongside.
What is the acceleration of the lift:
(i) during the first two seconds ?
(ii) between second and tenth second ?
(iii) during the last two seconds ?
Solution :



Question 59:
A car is moving on a straight road with uniform acceleration. The speed of the car varies with
time as follows :
Time (s)              :     0          2         4          6       8         10
Speed (m/s)       :     4          8       12        16     20         24
Draw the speed-time graph by choosing a convenient scale. From this graph :

(i) Calculate the acceleration of the car.
(ii) Calculate the distance travelled by the car in 10 seconds.
Solution :

Question 60:
The graph given alongside shows how the speed of a car changes with time:



(i) What is the initial speed of the car ?
(ii) What is the maximum speed attained by the car ?
(iii) Which part of the graph shows zero acceleration ?
(iv) Which part of the graph shows varying retardation ?
(v) Find the distance travelled in first 8 hours.
Solution :
(i) Initial speed of the car=10km/h
(ii) Maximum speed attained by the car= 35km/h
(iii) BC represents zero acceleration.
(iv) CD represents varying retardation.
(v)

Question 61:
Three speed-time graphs are given below :

Which graph represents the case of:
(i) a cricket ball thrown vertically upwards and returning to the hands of the thrower ?
(ii) a trolley decelerating to a constant speed and then accelerating uniformly ?
Solution :
(i) Graph (c): The speedof the ball goes on decreasing uniformly as it moves upward, reaches



zero at the highest point, and then increases uniformly as it moves downward.
(ii) Grap(a): The speed of the trolley decreases uniformly, then it moves at a constant speed,
and then the speed increases uniformly.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:44

Question 62:
Study the speed-time graph of a car given alongside and answer the following questions:

(i) What type of motion is represented by OA ?
(ii) What type of motion is represented by AB ?
(iii) What type of motion is represented by BC ?
(iv) What is the acceleration of car from O to A ?
(v)What is the acceleration of car from A to B ?
(vi) What is the retardation of car from B to C ?
Solution :
(i) OA represents uniform acceleration
(ii) AB represents constant speed.
(iii) BC represents uniform retardation.
(iv) Acceleration of car from O to A = slope of line OA
(v) Acceleration of car from A to B is zero as it has uniform speed during this time.
(vi) Retardation of car from B to C = slope of line BC

Question 63:
What type of motion is represented by each one of the following graphs ?

Solution :
(i) Graph (a) represents uniform acceleration.
(ii) Graph (b) represents constant speed.
(iii) Graph (c) represents uniform retardation.
(iv) Graph (d) represents non-uniform retardation.

Question 64:
-1 -2



A car is travelling along the road at 8 ms -1. It accelerates at 1 ms-2 for a distance of 18 m. How
fast is it then travelling ?
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=8m/s
Acceleration, a=1m/s2

Distance, s=18m

Question 65:
A car is travelling at 20 m/s along a road. A child runs out into the road 50 m ahead and the
car driver steps on the brake pedal. What must the car’s deceleration be if the car is to stop
just before it reaches the child ?
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=20m/s
Final velocity, v=0m/s
Distance, s=50m

The car’s deceleration must be 4 m/s2.



 Matter in Our Surroundings

Solution 1
The condition for something to be called matter is that it should occupy space and have
mass.
Solution 2
Diffusion and Brownian motion.
Solution 3
Diffusion.
Solution 4
The characteristic of matter illustrated by this observation is that the particles of matter have
spaces between them.
Solution 5
This displays that each crystal of Potassium Permanganate must be made up of millions of
small particles i.e. particles of matter are very very small.
Solution 6
This shows that the particles of matter are constantly moving in all direction.
Solution 7
This displays that the particles of matter attract one another. In case of chalk, the force of
attraction between the particles is weak whereas the force of attraction between the particles
of iron is very very strong.
Solution 8
Atoms or Molecules.
Solution 10
(a) Solid.



(b) Liquid and Gas.
Solution 11
(a) Gases.
(b) Solids.
(c) Solids.
Solution 12
Liquid.
Solution 13
Gas.
Solution 14
Solid.
Solution 15
Gas.
Solution 16
LPG (Liquefied Petroleum Gas) and Oxygen Gas respectively.
Solution 17
(a) LPG – Liquefied Petroleum Gas.
(b) CNG – Compressed Natural Gas.
Solution 18
Gas diffuses faster.
Solution 19
Copper Sulphate into water.
Solution 20
False.
Solution 21
Diffusion.
Solution 22
Diffusion.
Solution 23
Diffusion.
Solution 24
(a) Diffusion; Brownian motion.
(b) Diffusion.
(c) States.
(d) Much more.
(e) Liquid; Gaseous.

Solution 25
(a) Diffusion:
(i) Matter is made up of tiny particles
(ii) The particles of matter are constantly moving.
(b) Brownian motion:
(i) The particles of matter are very, very small.
(ii) The particles of matter are constantly moving.
Solution 26
Robert Brown suspended extremely small pollen grains in water and observed it through a
microscope. It was found that pollen grains were moving very rapidly throughout the water in a
very irregular way. He also observed that warmer the water, faster the pollen grains move on
the surface of water. This phenomenon is known as the ‘Brownian Motion’.
Solution 27
It shows that each potassium permanganate crystal is made up of millions of small particles
and particles of water have spaces between them.



Solution 28
Both bromine gas and air is made up of tiny moving particles. When a gas jar containing air is
inverted over gas jar containing bromine vapour, both bromine and air molecules move and
collide with one another and bounce about in all directions due to which we see a uniform red
brown colour in both the jars.
Solution 29
When salt is added to water and stirred, the tiny salt particles break off from each solid salt
granule and fill up the spaces available between the particles of water and mix with them.
Solution 30
Air is a gas whose particles are very far apart and there are very weak forces of attraction
between them. Extremely weak forces between particles of air can be overcome easily due to
which we can move our hand in air. On the other hand, the particles of a solid plank of wood
are very closely packed and there are very strong forces of attraction between the particles of
wood. Hence, it needs a huge outside force to overcome the strong inter particle attractions
which only a karate expert can apply.
Solution 31
If two metal blocks are bound together tightly and kept undistributed for a few years, then the
particles of one metal are found to have diffused into the other metal.
Solution 32
The diffusion between solids is a very, very slow process because the particles in solids do not
move from their fixed positions.
Solution 33
Solids diffuse the slowest as the particles in solids do not move from their fixed positions.
Gases diffuse the fastest as the particles in gases move very quickly in all directions.
Solution 34
The particles of gases produced by the burning of incense sticks move rapidly in all directions.
They collide with the particles of air present in the room, mix with air and reach every part of
the room quickly.
Solution 35
Three states of matter are:
(i) The solid state – Ice.
(ii) The liquid state – Water.
(iii) The gas state – Air.
Solution 36
(a) Characteristics of a solid:
(i) Solids have a fixed shape and fixed volume.
(ii) Solids do not flow.
(b) Characteristics of a liquid:
(i) Liquids have a fixed volume but no fixed shape, they take the shape of the vessel in which
they are placed.
(ii) They generally flow easily.
(c) Characteristics of a gas:
(i) Gases can be compressed easily.
(ii) Gases fill their container completely.
Solution 37
A gas does not have a fixed shape or fixed volume because the particles of gases do not have
fixed positions or fixed spaces between them.
Solution 38
(i) Solids – They have a fixed shape and a fixed volume.
(ii) Liquids – They have a fixed volume but no fixed shape.
(iii) Gases – They neither have a fixed shape nor a fixed volume.
Solution 39



Oxygen<Water<Sugar.
Solution 40
(a) Water is a liquid at room temperature because:
(i) Water has a fixed volume (which does not change on changing its container).
(ii) Water has no fixed shape (it takes the shape of the container in which it is kept).
(b) An iron almirah is a solid because:
(i) It has a fixed shape (which cannot be changed by pressing it with hands).
(ii) It has a fixed volume (which depends on the dimensions according to which it is made).
Solution 41
(a) Diffusion.
(b) The smell of food being cooked reaches the other room by the diffusion of gases released
into the air during the cooking of food.
Solution 42
(a) Diffusion in gases shows that their particles move very quickly in all directions and the rate
of diffusion of a gas depends on its density. Light gases diffuse faster than heavy gases.
(b) Gases like carbon dioxide and oxygen present in the atmosphere diffuse into water (of
ponds, lakes etc) and dissolves in it.
Solution 43
The smell of hot sizzling food reaches us quickly as compared to cold food because the rate
of diffusion of hot gases (released by hot sizzling food) into air is faster than that of cold
gases released by cold food.
Solution 44
The smell of food being cooked reaches us even from a considerable distance is because of
the process of diffusion.
Solution 45
The smell of perfume spreads due to the diffusion of perfume vapours into the air.
Solution 46
The spreading of blue colour of copper sulphate into water, on its own, is due to the diffusion
of copper sulphate particles into water.
Solution 47
The force of attraction between the particles of honey is much more than the force of
attraction between the particles of water.
Solution 48
(a) Air is used to inflate tyres because when we blow air into a tyre the air particles push the
tyre walls from inside and exerts pressure on them.
(b) Steel is used to make railway lines because steel is a rigid object having a definite shape
and definite volume.
Solution 49
Diffusion occurs more quickly in gases than in a liquid because the particles in gases move
very quickly in all directions whereas the particles in liquids move slowly as compared to the
gas particles.

Solution 50
(a) The spreading out and mixing of a substance due to the motion of its particles is called
diffusion. For example: Smell of food being cooked in the kitchen reaches us even from a
considerable distance.
(b) Gases diffuse very fast because the particles in gases move very quickly in all directions.
(c) Carbon dioxide and Oxygen gas dissolve in water by diffusion. This process is important as
these gases are essential for the survival of aquatic plants and animals. The aquatic plants
use the dissolved carbon dioxide for preparing food by photosynthesis and aquatic animals
use the dissolved oxygen in water for breathing.
Solution 51



(b) (i) Wood is a rigid object which has a tendency to maintain its shape when subjected to
outside force.
(ii) It has a definite shape and definite volume.
Solution 52
(a) Because of high energy and negligible forces of attraction, the particles of a gas move with
high speed in all directions. Thus, the pressure exerted by a gas is due to the constant
collisions of the fast moving gas particles against the walls of the container.
(b) The particles of a gas have high kinetic energy and negligible forces of attraction amongst
them. Due to this, the particles of a gas are constantly moving with high speeds in all the
directions and the gas completely fills the vessel in which it is kept.
(c) Gases can be compressed easily because its particles are far apart and there are large
spaces between them (which can be reduced by compression).
Solution 53
(a) Anything which occupies space and has mass is called matter.
Examples: Air, water, sugar, iron.
(b) The characteristics of matter are:
(i) The particles of matter are very, very small.
(ii) The particles of matter have spaces between them.
(iii) The particles of matter are constantly moving.
(iv) The particles of matter attract each other.
Solution 54
(a) The zig-zag movement of small particles suspended in a liquid (or gas) is called Brownian
motion. Brownian motion increases on increasing the temperature.

(b) These dust particles move in a haphazard way because they are constantly hit by the fast
moving particles of air.
Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 9 Solutions Page No: 21
Solution 66
(a) The red brown gas will diffuse from jar A into colorless gas in jar B due to which its red
brown colour will also spread into jar B.
(b) Diffusion (in gases).
(c) Bromine vapour.
(d) Air.
(e) Potassium permanganate and water.
Solution 67
Bromine diffuses slowly into air because the motion of bromine molecules is obstructed due
to the collisions with the moving molecules of air. Bromine diffuses very rapidly into vacuum
because there is ‘nothing’ in the vacuum to oppose the motion of bromine molecules.



Solution 68
Chlorine will diffuse faster than bromine vapour. This is because light gases diffuse faster
than heavy gases.
Solution 69
The molecules in a liquid (the brake oil) can move freely without being compressed much and
hence transmit the pressure applied on brake pedal to the brake drum (on moving wheel)
efficiently.
Solution 70
The steam is gaseous form of water. The molecules of water in steam move very rapidly in all
directions and fill the whole kitchen space with steam. Gases (including steam) fill their
container completely.
Solution 71
In both diffusion as well as osmosis, there is movement of particles from a region of higher
concentration to a region of lower concentration. Diffusion can take place without there being
a membrane or through a permeable membrane. But, Osmosis can take place through a semi-
permeable membrane.
(a) Osmosis
(b) Diffusion
(c) Osmosis
(d) Osmosis
(e) Osmosis
(f) Diffusion
(g) Diffusion
Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 9 Solutions Page No: 22
Solution 72
No, the student’s conclusion is wrong. The air from the upper jar also diffuses down into the
lower gas jar containing bromine vapour. But since the air is colourless it cannot be noticed by
the student.
Solution 73
The fast moving molecules of air trapped in the inflated balloon exert continuous pressure on
the thin, stretched rubber sheet of balloon and keep on diffusing out gradually through it.
Solution 74
(a) Pollen Grains.
(b) Water.
(c) Brownian motion.
(d) The fast moving water molecules are constantly hitting particles X causing them to move
in a zig-zag path.
(e) Robert Brown.
(f) The liquid Y is made up of extremely small particles which are constantly moving.
Solution 75
(a) Dust particles.
(b) Air.
(c) Brownian motion.
(d) The fast moving air molecules are constantly hitting the tiny dust particles causing them to
move rapidly in a very haphazard manner.
(e) The gaseous matter ‘air’ is made up of very tiny particles which are constantly moving.
Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 9 Solutions Page No: 36
Solution 1
373 K.
Solution 2
270 – 273 = -3oC.
Solution 3



573 – 273 = 300oC.
Solution 4
373 + 273 = 646 K.
Solution 5
273 + 78 = 351 K
Solution 6
-273oC
Solution 7
Latent heat.
Solution 8
(a) Degree Celsius – oC
(b) Kelvin – K.
Solution 9
Temp. on Kelvin scale = Temp. on Celsius scale + 273
Solution 10
273.
Solution 11
It means that 3.34 x 105 J of heat has to be supplied to change 1 Kg of ice (at its melting
point, 0oC) into water at the same temperature of 0oC.
Solution 12
It means that 22.5 x 105 J of heat is required to change 1 Kg of water (at its boiling point,
100oC) into steam at the same temperature of 100oC.
Solution 13
(a) Boiling point.
(b) Melting point.
Solution 14
Water.
Solution 15
(a) Sublimation.
(b) Sublimation.
Solution 16
Sublimation.
Solution 17
Sublimation.
Solution 18
Dry ice.
Solution 19
Since solid carbon dioxide directly changes into carbon dioxide gas (or sublimes), and does
not melt to produce a liquid (like ordinary ice), it is called dry ice.
Solution 20
Lowering temperature (or cooling)
Solution 21
False.
Solution 22
Carbon dioxide (solid).
Solution 23
(a) Pressure; temperature.
(b) Released.
(c) 273.
(d) Plasma; Bose-Einstein Condensate (BEC).
(e) Plasma
Solution 24



The heat energy that has to applied to change the state of a substance is called ‘latent heat’.
They are of two types:
(i) Latent heat of fusion and (ii) Latent heat of vaporization.
Solution 25
When a solid is heated, the heat energy makes its particles vibrate more vigorously. At the
melting point, the particles of solid have sufficient energy to overcome the strong forces of
attraction holding them in fixed positions and break to form small groups of particles. This
heat energy is kinetic energy.
Solution 26
When a change of state of a substance has to take place the heat given would not raise the
temperature.
Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 9 Solutions Page No: 37
Solution 27
The heat energy supplied to ice during the change of state (at its melting point) is all used up
in overcoming (or breaking) the force of attraction between its particles without increasing its
kinetic energy. Since the heat (or latent heat) supplied during the change of state does not
increase the kinetic energy of the ice cubes, therefore no rise in temperature takes place. The
temperature remains constant.
Solution 28
The heat energy supplied to water during the change of state (at its boiling point) is all used up
in overcoming (or breaking) the force of attraction between its particles without increasing its
kinetic energy. Since the heat (or latent heat) supplied during the change of state does not
increase the kinetic energy of the water, therefore no rise in temperature takes place. The
temperature remains constant.
Solution 29
This is due to the fact that for melting, each kilogram of ice takes its latent heat of 3.34 x 105
joules from the substance and hence cools the substance more effectively. On the other hand,
water at 0o cannot take any such latent heat from the substance.
Solution 30
We would place ice in the water to cool it more quickly because the ice takes its latent heat
from the water and hence cools it more effectively. On the other hand, if we keep the water on
ice then the latent heat would be taken from the surrounding air hence releasing its coolness
to the surrounding and not the water.
Solution 31
Steam causes more severe burns than boiling water because the steam contains more heat,
in the form of latent heat, than boiling water. Hence, when steam falls on our skin and
condenses to produce water, it gives out 22.5 x 105 Joules per kilogram more heat than
boiling water.
Solution 32
The latent heat of fusion of ice is 3.34 x 105 J/Kg. It means that 3.34x 105 joules of heat is
required to change 1 Kg of ice at its melting point of 0oC into water at the same temperature
(of 0oC). This means that 1 Kg of ice at 0oC has 3.34 x 105 joules of less heat than 1 kg of
water at the same temperature of 0oC.
Solution 33
1 Kg of steam at 100oC has more heat than water at the same temperature because when
water changes into steam, it absorbs latent heat, but when steam condenses to form water, an
equal amount of latent heat is given out.
Solution 34
It is because of the fact that steam at 100oC contains more heat, in the form of latent heat,
than boiling water at 100oC. Hence, steam would give out 22.5 x 105 joules per kilogram more
heat than boiling water.
Solution 35



Steam causes more severe burns than boiling water because the steam contains more heat,
in the form of latent heat, than boiling water. Hence, when steam falls on our skin and
condenses to produce water it gives out 22.5 x 105 joules per kilogram more heat than boiling
water.
Solution 36
The temperature of a substance remains constant during the change of state because the
heat gets used up in changing the state by overcoming the forces of attraction between the
particles.
Solution 37
(a) Either solid (as ice) or liquid as 0oC is the melting point of ice as well as the freezing point
of water.
(b) Liquid.
(c) Either a liquid or a gas (steam) as 100oC is the boiling point of water as well as the
condensation temperature of steam.
(d) Gas.
Solution 38
The temperature of a substance remains constant during the change of state though heat is
supplied continuously because the heat gets used up in changing the state by overcoming the
forces of attraction between the particles.
Solution 39
The temperature, at which a solid substance melts and changes into a liquid at atmospheric
pressure, is called melting point of the substance. The melting point of ice is 0oC.
Solution 40
The temperature, at which a liquid boils and changes rapidly into a gas at atmospheric
pressure, is called boiling point of the liquid. The boiling point of water is 100oC.
Solution 41
(a) Melting – The process in which a solid substance changes into a liquid on heating is called
melting.
(b) Boiling – The process in which a liquid substance changes into a gas rapidly on heating is
called boiling.
Solution 42
(a) Condensation – The process of changing a gas (or vapour) to a liquid by cooling is called
condensation.
(b) Freezing – The process of changing a liquid into a solid by cooling, is called freezing.
Solution 43
This happens because naphthalene balls undergo sublimation. The naphthalene balls keep on
forming naphthalene vapours slowly which disappear into the air.
Solution 44
Gases can be liquefied by applying pressure and lowering temperature. The temperature needs
to be lowered because when the gas is compressed too much, then heat is produced due to
compression. Cooling lowers the temperature of the compressed gas and helps in liquefying it.
Solution 45
Ammonia gas is liquefied by applying high pressure and lowering the temperature of the gas.
Lowering the temperature is done by continuously pouring water over the coils carrying the
compressed gas.
Solution 46
There is a lot of space between the particles of a gas. If enough pressure is applied to the gas,
it gets highly compressed. The particles of gas get so close together that they start attracting
each other sufficiently to form a liquid. And we say that the gas has liquefied.
Solution 47
On a hot day, when our body temperature tends to rise too much, our sweat glands give out
moisture (sweat) on our skin. When this sweat evaporates, it takes the latent heat of



vaporization from our body hence making our body cool.
Solution 48
All water on earth does not get evaporated on hot summer days because of the high value of
latent heat of vaporization of water.
Solution 49
Liquids like alcohol, petrol and perfume are volatile (which can change into vapours easily).
When we apply alcohol to the back of our hand, we find that it dries up quickly and while it is
drying, the hands feel cold. This happens due to the fact that to change from liquid to the
vapour state, alcohol requires latent heat of vaporization. The alcohol takes this latent heat of
vaporization from the hand due to which the hand loses heat and we feel cold.
Solution 50
The cooling in a desert room cooler is caused by the evaporation of water. The higher
temperature on a hot day increases the rate of evaporation of water, and the dryness of air
also increases the rate of evaporation of water. And due to this increased rate of evaporation
of water, a desert room cooler works better on a hot and dry day.
Solution 51
The earthen pot (or matka) has a large number of extremely small pores on its walls. Some of
the water kept in the earthen pot continuously keeps seeping through these pores to the
outside of the pot. This water evaporates continuously by taking the latent heat of vaporization
from the earthen pot and the remaining water. In this way, the earthen pot and remaining
water loses heat and gets cooled.
Solution 52
We should wear cotton clothes in hot summer days because we perspire more through the
pores of the skin during such days. Since, sweat is mainly water and cotton clothes are good
absorber of water, they absorb the sweat quickly and expose it to the atmosphere for
evaporation. The evaporation of sweat from the cotton clothes takes the latent heat of
vaporization from our skin hence the skin loses heat and makes us feel cool and comfortable.
Solution 53
If the hot tea or milk is taken in a cup, then due to the narrow shape of the cup, the surface
area of hot tea in the cup is comparatively small. Due to this, the evaporation of hot tea is
slow; cooling caused by evaporation is less and hence the hot tea remains appreciably hot for
a much longer time. On the other hand, the saucer has a large surface area due to which the
tea taken in the saucer evaporates much faster, thus cooling it quickly and making it
convenient to sip or drink.
Solution 54
Acetone (or perfume) is volatile in nature. When we apply it to our palm, we feel cold. This
happens due to the fact that to change from liquid to the vapour state, acetone requires latent
heat of vaporization. Acetone takes this latent heat of vaporization from the hand due to which
the palm loses heat and feels cold.
Solution 55
The presence of water vapour in air can be demonstrated by the following experiment: We take
a steel tumbler and put some well crushed ice in it. Allow the steel tumbler to stand
undisturbed for about 5 minutes with the ice in it. We would observe that a large number of
tiny drops of water appear on the outer surface of the steel tumbler. This happens because the
air around the steel tumbler contains water vapour in it. When these water vapour come in
contact with the cold, outside surface of steel tumbler, they condense to form tiny drops of
liquid.
Solution 56
(a) The latent heat of fusion of a solid is the quantity of heat in joules required to convert 1 Kg
of the solid (at its melting point) to liquid, without any change in temperature. The latent heat
of fusion of ice is 3.34 x 105 J/Kg.
(b)



Solution 57
(a) The latent heat of vaporization of a liquid is the quantity of heat in joules required to convert
1 Kg of the liquid (at its boiling point) to vapour or gas without any change in temperature. The
latent heat of vaporization of water is 22.5 x 105 J/Kg.
(b)

Solution 58
(a) The changing of a solid directly into vapours on heating and of vapours into solid on



cooling is known as sublimation. The common substances which undergo sublimation are
Camphor and Naphthalene.
(b)

Solution 59
(a) The physical states of matter can be changed by changing pressure and changing the
temperature.
(b)

Solution 60
(a) The process of a liquid changing into vapour (or gas) even below its boiling point is called
evaporation. The factors affecting rate of evaporation are:
(i) Temperature.
(ii) Surface area.
(iii) Humidity.



(iv) Wind speed.
(b) Evaporation causes cooling because when a liquid evaporates, it draws or takes the latent
heat of vaporisation from ‘anything’ which it touches and hence the substances or
surroundings lose heat and get cooled.
Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 9 Solutions Page No: 39
Solution 81
(a) (i) W – Iodine (ii) X – Sodium Chloride (iii) Y – Naphthalene (iv) Z – Ammonium chloride.
(b) W – Iodine; Y – Naphthalene; Z – Ammonium chloride.
(c) Y – Naphthalene.
(d) Tincture Iodine.
(e) W – Iodine.
Solution 82
(a) (i) Water (ii) Ice (iii) Steam.
(b) Freezing.
(c) 0oC.
(d) Boiling (or vaporisation).
(e) 100oC
Solution 83
(a) (i) Liquid (ii) Gas (iii) Solid (iv) Plasma (v) Bose-Einstein Condensate (BEC).
(b) Ammonium chloride; Sublimation.
(c) Carbon dioxide.
(d) Water.
(e) D (plasma).
Solution 84
(a) 273 K.
(b) Freezing.
(c) Latent heat of freezing.
(d) Melting.
(e) Latent heat of fusion.
Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 9 Solutions Page No: 40
Solution 85
(a) 373 K.
(b) Boiling (or vaporisation).
(c) Latent heat of vaporisation.
(d) Condensation.
(e) Latent heat of condensation.



 Force and Laws of Motion

Question 1:
What name is given to the product of mass and velocity of a body ?
Solution :
The product of mass and velocity of a body is called momentum.

Question 2:
Name the physical quantity which is considered to be a measure of the quantity of motion of a
body.
Solution :
Momentum is the measure of quantity of motion of a body

Question 3:
What is the SI unit of momentum ?
Solution :
The SI unit of momentum is kilogram meters per second(kg.m/s)

Question 4:
State whether momentum is scalar or vector.
Solution :
Momentum is a vector quantity and is dirceted along the direction of velocity.

Question 5:
What is the total momentum of the bullet and the gun before firing ?
Solution :
The total momentum of the bullet and the gun before firing would be zero because velocities
of both of them will be zero.

Question 6:
Name the physical quantity whose unit is kg.m/s.
Solution :

Momentum has its SI unit as kilogram meters per second(kg.m/s)



Question 7:
What will be the momentum of a body of mass ‘m’ which is moving with a velocity V ?
Solution :
Momentum of a body of mass ‘m’ and velocity ‘v’ will be
p = m x v

Question 8:
What is the usual name of the forces which cannot produce motion in a body but only change
its shape ?
Solution :
Balanced forces cannot produce motion in a body but can its shape.

Question 9:
Name the unbalanced force which slows down a moving bicycle when we stop pedalling it.
Solution :
Frictional force slows down a moving bicycle when we stop pedaling it.

Question 10:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Unbalanced forces acting on a body change its shape.
Solution :
The given statement is false.

Question 11:
When a ball is dropped from a height, its speed increases gradually. Name the force which
causes this change in speed.
Solution :
Force of gravity causes this change in speed.

Question 12:
Name the property of bodies (or objects) to resist a change in their state of rest or of motion.
Solution :
Inertia is the property of bodies to resist a change in their state of rest or motion

Question 13:
What is the other name of Newton’s first law of motion ?
Solution :
Newton’s first law of motion is also known as Galileo’s law of inertia.

Question 14:
The mass of object A is 6 kg whereas that of another object B is 34 kg. Which of the two
objects, A or B, has more inertia ?
Solution :
Object B has more inertia. Since mass is a measure of inertia of a body and object B has
greater mass, so it will have greater inertia.

Question 15:
Name the scientist who gave the laws of motion.
Solution :
Isaac Newton gave the laws of motion.



Question 16:
State whether force is a scalar or a vector quantity.
Solution :
Force is a vector quantity.

Question 17:
With which physical quantity should the speed of a running bull be multiplied so as to obtain
its momentum ?
Solution :
The speed of the running bull should be multiplied with its mass to get its momentum.

Question 18:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) ………………is a measure of the inertia of a body.
(b) When a running car stops suddenly, the passengers are jerked …………………..
(c) When a stationary car starts suddenly, the passengers are jerked …………………..
(d) Newton’s first law of motion is also called Galileo’s law of ………………………
(e) If there were no unbalanced force of……………….. and no…………………. resistance, a moving
bicycle would go on moving for ever.
Solution :
a) Mass
b) forward
c) backward
d) inertia
e) friction; air

Question 19:
Explain why, it is easier to stop a tennis ball than a cricket ball moving with the same speed.
Solution :
Since the speed of tennis ball and cricket ball is same, the momentum of cricket ball will be
higher due to its mass being greater than mass of tennis ball. So, less force is required to stop
a tennis ball than to stop a cricket ball.

Question 20:
Explain the meaning of the following equation : .
p = m x v
where symbols have their usual meanings.
Solution :
p = m x v
This equation signifies that momentum of a body is the product of its mass and its velocity.
Here, p is momentum of the body
m is the mass of the body
v is the velocity of the body.

Question 21:
Explain how, a karate player can break a pile of tiles with a single blow of his hand.
Solution :
A karate player can break a pile of tiles with a single blow because he strikes the pile with his
hand very fast. In doing so, the large momentum of his hand is reduced to zero in a very short
time. This exerts a large force on the pile of tiles which is sufficient to break them apart.

Question 22:



Calculate the momentum of a toy car of mass 200 g moving with a speed of 5 m/s.
Solution :
Mass of the toy car,
m = 200 g = 0.2 kg
Speed, v = 5 m/s
Momentum, p = m x v
= 0.2 x 5 = 1 kg.m/s

Question 23:
What is the change in momentum of a car weighing 1500 kg when its speed increases from
36 km/h to 72 km/h uniformly ?
Solution :
Mass of car = 1500 kg
Velocity v1 = 36 km/hr = 10 m/s
Momentum p1 = 1500 x 10 = 15000 kg.m/s
Velocity v2 = 72 km/hr = 20 m/s
Momentum p2 = 1500 x 20 = 30000 kg.m/s
Change in momentum = p2-p1= 30000 – 15000 = 15000 kg.m/s

Question 24:
A body of mass 25 kg has a momentum of 125 kg.m/s. Calculate the velocity of the body.
Solution :
Mass of the body, m = 25 kg
Momentum p = 125 kg.m/s
p = m x v

Question 25:
 Calculate the momentum of the following :
(a) an elephant of mass 2000 kg moving at 5 m/s
(b) a bullet of mass 0.02 kg moving at 400 m/s

Solution :
a) Mass of elephant = 2000kg
Velocity = 5 m/s
Momentum = 2000 x 5 = 10000 kg.m/s
b) Mass of bullet = 0.02 kg
Velocity = 400 m/s
Momentum = 0.02 x 400 = 8 kg.m/s

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:56



Question 26:
Which of the two, balanced forces or unbalanced forces, can change the shape of an object ?
Give an example to illustrate your answer.
Solution :
Balanced forces can change the shape of the object. For example, when a balloon is pressed
between hands, then balanced forces (equal and opposite forces) act on the balloon due to
which the shape of the balloon changes.

Question 27:
Describe the term ‘inertia’ with respect to motion.
Solution :
Inertia of motion is the property of a body due to which it resists a change in its state of
uniform motion. For eg., if there is no air resistance and no friction to oppose the motion of a
moving bicycle, it will go on moving forever.

Question 28:
State Newton’s first law of motion. Give two examples to illustrate Newton’s first law of
motion.
Solution :
Newton’s first law of motion states that a body at rest will remain at rest, and a body in motion
will continue in motion in a straight line with a uniform speed unless it is compelled by an
external force to change its state of rest or of uniform motion. For example, a book lying on a
table remains on the table unless we lift it with the force of our hands. And, on a frictionless
surface, a moving car continues to be in the state of motion until brakes are applied on it.

Question 29:
On what factor does the inertia of a body depend ? Which has more inertia, a cricket ball or a
rubber ball of the same size ?
Solution :
Inertia of a body depends on its mass. A cricket ball has more inertia than a rubber ball of the
same size because it has more mass than the rubber ball.

Question 30:
Why do the passengers in a bus tend to fall backward when it starts suddenly ?
Solution :
When a bus starts suddenly, its passengers tend to fall backwards because due to their inertia,
the passengers tend to remain in a state of rest even when the bus starts moving.

Question 31:
Explain why, a person travelling in a bus falls forward when the bus stops suddenly.
Solution :
When a bus stops suddenly, its passengers tend to fall forward because due to their inertia,
the passengers tend to remain in a state of motion even though the bus has come to rest.

Question 32:
Give reason for the following :
When a hanging carpet is beaten with a stick, the dust particles start coming out of it.
Solution :
When a hanging carpet is beaten with a stick, the carpet moves to and fro with the force of the
stick while the dust particles remain in their state of rest on account of their inertia and thus
dust particles separate out from the carpet.



Question 33:
When a tree is shaken, its fruits and leaves fall down: Why ?
Solution :
When a tree is shaken, the tree moves to and fro while the fruits and leaves remain in their
state of rest on account of their inertia and thus fruits and leaves separate from the tree and
fall from the tree.

Question 34:
Explain why, it is dangerous to jump out of a moving bus.
Solution :
It is dangerous to jump out of a moving bus because the jumping man, who is moving with the
high speed of the bus would tend to remain in state of motion due to inertia even on falling to
the ground and get hurt due to resistance offered by the ground.

Question 35:
What is the momentum in kg.m/s of a 10 kg car travelling at (a) 5 m/s (b) 20 cm/s, and (c) 36
km/h ?
Solution :
Mass of car, m = 10 kg
Momentum = m x v
a) Velocity, v = 5 m/s Momentum = 10 x 5 = 50 kg.m/s
b) Velocity, v = 20 cm/s = 0.2 m/s Momentum = 10 x 0.2 = 2 kg.m/s
c) Velocity, v = 36km/hr = 10 m/s Momentum = 10 x 10 = 100 kg.m/s

Question 36:
(a) Define momentum of a body. On what factors does the momentum of a body depend ?
(b) Calculate the change in momentum of a body weighing 5 kg when its velocity decreases
from 20 m/s to 0.20 m/s.
Solution :
a) Momentum is the physical quantity which is the measure of the quantity of motion of a
moving body. It depends on mass and velocity of the body.
b) Mass of body = 5 kg
Velocity v1 = 20 m/s
Momentum p1 = 20 x 5 = 100 kg.m/s
Velocity v2 = 0.2 m/s
Momentum p2 = 5 x 0.2 = 1 kg.m/s
Change in momentum = p2– p1= 1-100 = -99 kg.m/s (Negative sign shows that momentum
decreases)

Question 37:
(a) Define the term ‘force’.
(b) State the various effects of force.
Solution :
a) Force is an influence which tends to set a stationary body in motion or stop a moving body;
or which tends to change the speed and direction of a moving body; or which tends to change
the shape and size of a body.
b) Various effects of force are
i) A force can move a stationary body.
ii) A force can stop a moving body.
iii) A force can change the speed of a moving body.
iv) A force can change the direction of a moving body.
v) A force can change the shape and size of a body.



Question 38:
Give one example each where :
(a) a force moves a stationary body.
(b) a force stops a moving body.
(c) a force changes the speed of a moving body.
(d) a force changes the direction of a moving body.
(e) a force changes the shape (and size) of a body.
Solution :
a) Kicking a stationary football.
b) Applying brakes to a moving bicycle.
c) Pressing an accelerator to speed up a moving car.
d) A moving cricket ball hit by a bat.
e) Flattening of dough by a rolling pin to make chapatis.

Question 39:
(a) What do you understand by the terms “balanced forces” and “unbalanced forces” ? Explain
with examples.
(b) What type of forces – balanced or unbalanced – act on a rubber ball when we press it
between our hands ? What effect is produced in the ball ?
Solution :
a) If the resultant of all the forces acting on a body is zero, the forces are called balanced
forces. These forces do not change the state of rest or of uniform motion of a body but can
change the shape of the body. For example, when a balloon is pressed between hands, then
balanced forces (equal and opposite forces) act on the balloon due to which the shape of the
balloon changes.
If the resultant of all the forces acting on a body is not zero, the forces are called unbalanced
forces. These forces change the state of rest or of uniform motion of a body. For eg., if we
push a toy car lying on the ground, it starts moving due to the unbalanced force exerted by our
hands.
b) When we press a rubber ball between our hands, balanced forces acts on it and hence its
shape changes.

Question 40:
(a) What happens to the passengers travelling in a bus when the bus takes a sharp turn ? Give
reasons for
your answer.
(b) Why are road accidents at high speeds very much worse than road accidents at low
speeds ?

Solution :
a) When a bus takes a sharp turn, the passengers tend to fall sideways because of their inertia
or their tendency to continue moving in a straight line.
b) Road accidents at high speeds are much worse than road accidents at low speeds because
the momentum of vehicles at high speeds is very high and causes a lot of damage to the



vehicles and injuries to the passengers during collision.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:57

Question 51:
A plastic ball and a clay ball of equal masses, travelling in the same direction with equal
speeds, strike against a vertical wall. From which ball does the wall receive a greater amount of
momentum ?
Solution :
The wall will receive equal momentum from both the balls because both balls have equal
mass and velocity.

Question 52:
A moving bicycle comes to rest after sometime if we stop pedalling it. But Newton’s first law
of motion says that a moving body should continue to move for ever, unless some external
force acts on it. How do you explain the bicycle case ?
Solution :
In this case, the bicycle has been compelled to change its state of motion by the external force
of air resistance and friction. If there were no air resistance and no friction to oppose the
motion of the bicycle, then according to the first law of motion, the bicycle would go on
moving forever.

Question 53:
A man throws a ball weighing 500 g vertically upwards with a speed of 10 m/s.

1. What will be its initial momentum ?
2. What would be its momentum at the highest point of its flight ?

Solution :
Mass of ball = 500 g = 0.5 kg
Initial velocity = 10 m/s

1. Initial momentum = 0.5 x 10 = 5 kg.m/s
2. Velocity at the highest point = 0 m/s

Momentum at the highest point = 0.5 x 0 = 0 kg.m/s

Question 54:
A car is moving on a level road. If the driver turns off the engine of the car, the car’s speed
decreases gradually and ultimately it comes to a stop. A student says that two forces act on
the car which bring it to a stop. What could these forces be ? Which of these two forces
contributes more to slow down and stop the car ?
Solution :
The two forces acting on the car are force of friction and air resistance. Force of friction
contributes more to slow down and stop the car.

Question 55:
There are two types of forces X and Y. The forces belonging to type X can produce motion in a
stationary object but cannot change the shape of the object. On the other hand, forces
belonging to type Y cannot produce motion in a stationary object but can change the shape of
the object. What is the general name of the forces such as (a) X, and (b) Y ?
Solution :



a) X are unbalanced force.
b) Y are balanced forces.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:74

Question 1:
Which physical quantity corresponds to the rate of change of momentum ?
Solution :
Force corresponds to the rate of change of momentum.

Question 2:
State the relation between the momentum of a body and the force acting on it.
Solution :
The rate of change of momentum of a body is directly proportional to the applied force and
takes place in the direction in which the force acts.

Question 3:
What is tire unit of force ?
Solution :
The SI unit of force is newton(N)

Question 4:
Define one newton force.
Solution :
A newton force is defined as that force which when acting on a body of mass of 1 kg
produces an acceleration of 1m/s2 in it.

Question 5:
What is the relationship between force and acceleration ?
Solution :
Force acting on a body is directly proportional to the acceleration produced in the body.

Question 6:
If the mass of a body and the force acting on it are both doubled, what happens to the
acceleration ?
Solution :

Acceleration remains same since
Now if force is doubled i.e. 2F and mass is doubled i.e. 2m
Then acceleration

Question 7:
Name the physical quantity whose unit is ‘newton’.
Solution :
Newton is the SI unit of force.



Question 8:
Which physical principle is involved in the working of a jet aeroplane ?
Solution :
Jet airplanes work on the principle of conservation of momentum.

Question 9:
Name the principle on which a rocket works.
Solution :
Rockets work on the principle of conservation of momentum.

Question 10:
Is the following statement true or false :
A rocket can propel itself in a vacuum.
Solution :
True, because rocket does not require air for obtaining uplift or for burning its fuel.

Question 11:
What is the force which produces an acceleration of 1 m /s2  in a body of mass 1 kg ?
Solution :
Mass, m = 1 kg
Acceleration, a =
1m/s2

Force F = m x a = 1
x 1= 1N

Question 12:
Find the acceleration produced by a force of 5 N acting on a mass of 10 kg.
Solution :
Force F =5 N
Mass m = 10 kg

Question 13:
A girl weighing 25 kg stands on the tloor. She exerts a downward force of 250 N on the floor.
What force does the floor exert on her ?
Solution :
The force exerted by the floor on her = the downward force exerted by the girl =250 N
This is due to Newton’s third law of motion which states that to every action there is an equal
and opposite reaction.

Question 14:
Name the physical quantity which makes it easier to accelerate a small car than a large car.
Solution :
Less mass of the small car makes it easier to accelerate a small car than a large car because
acceleration is inversely
proportional to mass of the car

Question 15:



Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) To every action, there is an………………….. and…………………… reaction
(b)  Momentum is a…………….. Its emit is……………………
(c)  Newton’s second law of motion can be written as Force = mass x …………………………… or
Force = ……………….. of change of……………….
(d)  Forces in a Newton’s third law pair have equal………………… but act in opposite………………..
(e)  In collisions and explosions, the total ……………… remains constant, provided that no
external……………………..
Solution :
a) Equal; opposite
b) Vector; kg.m/s
c) Acceleration; rate; momentum
d) Magnitude; directions
e) Momentum; force

Question 16:
Explain the meaning of the following equation :
F = m x a
where symbols have their usual meanings
Solution :
Force is directly proportional to the product of ‘mass’ of the body and the ‘acceleration’
produced in the body by the action of force.
F = m x a
where F is the force applied on the body
m is the mass of the body
a is the acceleration produced in the body

Question 17:
To take the boat away from the bank of a river, the boatman pushes the bank with an oar. Why
?
Solution :
To take boat away from the bank of a river, the boatman pushes the bank with the oar. The
bank exerts an equal and opposite force on the boat which makes the boat move forward
away from the bank.

Question 18:
Why does a gunman get a jerk on firing a bullet ?

Solution :
Gunman gets a jerk on firing a bullet because when a bullet is fired from a gun, the force
sending the bullet forward is equal to the force sending the gun backwards but due to high
mass of the gun, it moves only a little distance backwards giving a jerk to the gunman.

Question 19:



If action is always equal to reaction, explain why a cart pulled by a horse can be moved.
Solution :
To make the cart move, the horse bends forward and pushes the ground with its feet. When
the forward reaction to the backward push of the horse on the ground is greater than the
opposing frictional forces of the wheels, the cart moves.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:75

Question 20:
Explain how a rocket works
Solution :
A rockets works on the principle of action and reaction. In a rocket, the hot gases produced by
the rapid burning of fuel rush out of a jet at the bottom of the rocket at a very high speed. The
equal and opposite reaction force of the downward going gases pushes the rocket upward
with a great speed.

Question 21
Do action and reaction act on the same body or different bodies ? How are they related in
magnitude and direction ? Are they simultaneous or not ?
Solution :
Action and reaction act on two different bodies. Action and reaction are equal in magnitude
but they act in opposite directions and there is simultaneous action and reaction.

Question 22
If a man jumps out from a boat, the boat moves backwards. Why ?
Solution :
When a man jumps out from a boat, the boat moves backwards due to the fact that to step out
of the boat, the man presses the boat with his foot in the backward direction. The push of the
man on the boat is action. The boat exerts an equal force on the man in the forward direction
and since the boat is not fixed and is floating, it moves backwards due to the action force
exerted by the man.

Question 23
Why is it difficult to walk on a slippery road ?
Solution :
It becomes very difficult to walk on a slippery road because of the fact that on a slippery road,
the friction is much less, and we cannot exert a backward action force on slippery ground
which would produce a forward reaction force on us.

Question 24:
Explain why, a runner presses the ground with his feet before he starts his run.
Solution :
To start his run, a runner bends forward and pushes the ground with his feet in the backward
direction. In turn ground exerts a reaction force on the runner in the forward direction which
makes him run.

Question 25:
A 60 g bullet fired from a 5 kg gun leaves with a speed of 500 m/s. Find the speed (velocity)
with which the gun recoils (jerks backwards).
Solution :
Mass of bullet, m1 = 60g = 0.06 kg
Velocity of bullet v1 = 500 m/s



Mass of gun m2 = 5 kg
Recoil velocity v2
According to the law of conservation of momentum
m1 x v1 = m2 x v2
0.06 x 500 = 5 x v2

Question 26:
A 10 g bullet travelling at 200 m/s strikes and remains embedded in a 2 kg target which is
originally at rest but free to move. At what speed does the target move off ?
Solution :
Mass of bullet, m1 = 10g = 0.01 kg
Velocity of bullet v1 = 200 m/s
Mass of block with the bullet as bullet gets embedded in it, m2 = 2+0.01 = 2.01 kg
Recoil velocity v2
According to the law of conservation of momentum m1 x v1 = m2 x v2
0.01 x 200 = 2.01 x v2

Question 27:
A body of mass 2 kg is at rest. What should be the magnitude of force which will make the
body move with
a speed of 30 m/s at the end of 1 s ?
Solution :
Mass of the body = 2kg
Initial velocity u = 0
Final velocity v = 30 m/s
Time t = 1 s

Question 28:
A body of mass 5 kg is moving with a velocity of 10 m/s. A force is applied to it so that in 25
seconds, it attains a velocity of 35 m/s. Calculate the value of the force applied.
Solution :
Mass of the body = 5 kg
Initial velocity u = 10 m/s



Final velocity v = 35 m/s
Time t = 25 s

Question 29:
A car of mass 2400 kg moving with a velocity of 20 m s -1 is stopped in 10 seconds on applying
brakes. Calculate the retardation and the retarding force.
Solution :
Mass of the car = 2400 kg
Initial velocity u = 20 m/s
Final velocity v = 0 m/s
Time t = 10 s

Question 30:
For how long should a force of 100 N act on a body of 20 kg so that it acquires a velocity of
100 m/s ?
Solution :
Mass of the body = 20 kg
Initial velocity u = 0 m/s
Final velocity v = 100 m/s
Force F = 100 N

Question 31:
How long will it take a force of 10 N to stop a mass of 2.5 kg which is moving at 20 m/s ?
Solution :
Mass of the body = 2.5 kg
Initial velocity u = 20 m/s
Final velocity v = 0 m/s
Force F = 10 N



Question 32:
The velocity of a body of mass 10 kg increases from 4 m/s to 8 m/s when a force acts on it
for 2 s.
(a) What is the momentum before the force acts ?
(b) What is the momentum after the force acts ?
(c) What is the gain in momentum per second ?
(d) What is the value of the force ?
Solution :
Mass of the body = 10 kg
Initial velocity u = 4 m/s
Final velocity v = 8 m/s
Time t = 2 s
a) Momentum before force acts p1= m x u = 10 x 4 = 40 kg.m/s
b) Momentum after force acts p2 = m x v = 10 x 8 = 80 kg.m/s
c) Gain in momentum for 2 s = p2-p1 =40 kg.m/s

Question 33:
A gun of mass 3 kg fires a bullet of mass 30 g. The bullet takes 0.003 s to move through the
barrel of the gun and acquires a velocity of 100 m/s. Calculate :
(i) the velocity with which the gun recoils.
(ii) the force exerted on gunman due to recoil of the gun
Solution :
Mass of the gun m1 = 3 kg
Mass of bullet m2 = 30 g = 0.03 kg
Velocity of bullet v2 =100 m/s
i) According to the law of conservation of momentum
m1 x v1 = m2 x v2
3 x v1= 0.03 x 100

Question 34:
Draw a diagram to show how a rocket engine provides a force to move the rocket upwards.
Label the diagram appropriately.
Solution :



Question 35:
Name the laws involved in the following situations :
(a) the sum of products of masses and velocities of two moving bodies before and after their
collision remains the same.
(b) a body of mass 5 kg can be accelerated more easily by a force than another body of mass
50 kg under similar conditions
(c) when person A standing on roller skates pushes another person B (also standing on roller
skates) and makes him move to the right side, then the person A himself gets moved to the
left side by an equal distance.
(d) if there were no friction and no air resistance, then a moving bicycle would go on moving
for ever.
Solution :
a)Law of conservation of momentum
b)Newton’s second law of motion
c) Newton’s third law of motion
d)Newton’s first law of motion

Question 36:
(a) State and explain Newton’s second law of motion.
(b) A 1000 kg vehicle moving with a speed of 20 m/s is brought to rest in a distance of 50
metres :
(i) Find the acceleration.
(ii) Calculate the unbalanced force acting on the vehicle.
Solution :
(a) According to Newton’s second law of motion: The rate of change of momentum of a body
is directly proportional to the applied force, and takes place in the direction in which the force
acts.
Consider a body of mass m having initial velocity u. the initial momentum of this body will be
mu. Suppose a force F acts on this body for time t causing the final velocity to be v. The final
momentum of the body will be mv. Now the change in momentum is mv � mu and the time
taken for this change is t. So according to Newton’s second law of motion,



Question 37:
(a) Explain why, a cricket player moves his hands backwards while catching a fast cricket ball.
(b) A 150 g ball, travelling at 30 m/s, strikes the palm of a player’s hand and is stopped in 0.05
second. Find the force exerted by the ball on the hand.
Solution :
a) A player moves his hands backwards while catching a fast ball because a fast moving ball
has a large momentum and in stopping this ball, its momentum has
to be reduced to zero. Now, when a cricket player moves back his hands on catching the fast
ball, then the time taken to reduce the momentum of the ball is increased. So, the rate of
change of momentum of ball is decreased and hence a small force is exerted on the hands of
the player and the hands of the player do not get hurt.
b)Mass of ball = 150 g = 0.15 kg
Initial velocity u = 30 m/s
Final velocity v = 0 m/s
Time t = 0.05 s

Question 38:
(a) State Newton’s third law of motion and give two examples to illustrate the law.
(b) Explain why, when a fireman directs a powerful stream of water on a fire from a hose pipe,
the hose pipe tends to go backward.



Solution :
a) According to Newton’s third law of motion: Whenever one body exerts a force on another
body, the second body exerts an equal and opposite force on the first body. In other words, to
every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. Two examples to illustrate this law-
When a man jumps out from a boat, the boat moves backwards. This is due to the fact that to
step out of the boat, the man presses the boat with his foot in the backward direction. The
push of the man on the boat is action. The boat exerts an equal force in the forward direction
and since the boat is not fixed and is floating, it moves backwards due to the action force
exerted by the man.
Gunman gets a jerk on firing a bullet from his gun. This is because when a bullet is fired from a
gun, the force sending the bullet forward is equal to the force sending the gun backwards but
due to high mass of the gun, it moves only a little distance backwards giving a jerk to the
gunman.
b) When a fireman directs a powerful stream of water on a fire, the hose pipe tends to go
backward due to the reaction force of the water rushing through it in the forward direction at a
great speed.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:76

Question 39:
(a) State the law of conservation of momentum.
(b) Discuss the conservation of momentum in each of the following cases :
(i) a rocket taking off from ground.
(ii) flying of a jet aeroplane.
Solution :
a) According to the law of conservation of momentum: When two (or more) bodies act upon
one another, their total momentum remains constant (or conserved) provided no external
forces are acting. It means that when one body gains momentum, then some other body loses
an equal amount of momentum i.e. momentum is neither created nor destroyed.
b)
a. Rocket taking off from the ground The chemicals inside the rocket burn and produce very
high velocity blast of hot gases. These gases pass out through the tail nozzle of the rocket in
the downward direction with tremendous speed and the rocket moves up to balance the
momentum of the gases. The gases have a very high velocity ang hence a very large
momentum. An equal momentum is imparted to the rocket in the opposite direction, so that it
goes up with a high velocity.
b. Flying of jet aeroplane
In jet aeroplanes, a large volume of gases produced by the combustion of fuel is allowed to
escape through a jet in backward direction. Due to high velocity, the backward rushing gases
have a large momentum. They impart an equal and opposite momentum to the jet aeroplane
due to which it moves forward with a great speed.

Question 40:
(a) If a balloon filled with air and its mouth untied/ is released with its mouth in the downward
direction, it
moves upwards. Why ?
(b) An unloaded truck weighing 2000 kg has a maximum acceleration of 0.5 m/s2. What is the
maximum acceleration when it is carrying a load of 2000 kg ?
Solution :
a) If of a balloon filled with compressed air and its mouth untied is released with its mouth in
the downward direction, the balloon moves in the upward direction because the air present in
the balloon rushes out in the downward direction. The equal and opposite reaction of



downward going air pushes the balloon upwards.
b) Mass of the unloaded truck, m1= 2000 kg
Acceleration a 2

1 = 0.5 m/s
Mass of loaded truck, m2 = 2000+ 2000 = 4000 kg
Acceleration a2
m1 x a1 = m2 x a2

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:77

Question 51:
Why are car seat-belts designed to stretch some what in a collision ?
Solution :
Car seat-belts are somewhat stretchable so as to increase the time taken by the passengers to
fall forward. Due to this, the rate of change of momentum of passengers is reduced and hence
less stopping force acts on them. So the passengers do not get hurt.

Question 52:
The troops (soldiers) equipped to be dropped by parachutes from an aircraft are called
paratroopers. Why do paratroopers roll on landing ?

Solution :
The paratroopers roll on landing to increase the time taken to reduce the momentum of their
body. Thus, the rate of change of momentum is reduced and hence less force is exerted on
their legs and they do not get hurt.

Question 53:
Why would an aircraft be unable to fly on the moon ?
Solution :
An aircraft needs air because air moving under the wings of aircraft is strong enough to hold it
up and air is also required to burn the fuel in aircraft engines. Since there is no air on moon, an
aircraft cannot fly on moon.

Question 54:
Explain why it is possible for a small animal to fall from a considerable height without any
injury being caused when it reaches the ground.
Solution :
It is possible for a small animal to fall from a considerable height without being injured



because a small animal has small mass, so the momentum produced is less. When the small
animal falls to the ground with less momentum, less opposing force of ground acts on it and
hence no injury is caused to it

Question 55:
A boy of mass 50 kg running at 5 m/s jumps on to a 20 kg trolley travelling in the same
direction at 1.5 m/s. What is their common velocity ?
Solution :
Mass of the boy, m1= 50 kg
Speed of boy, u1 = 5 m/s
Mass of trolley m2 = 20 kg
Speed of trolley u2 =1.5 m/s
Combined mass of boy and trolley, m = 20+ 50 = 70 kg
Combined velocity v
Acc. to the law of conservation of momentum
m1u1 + m2u2 = mv
50 x 5 + 20 x 1.5 = 70 x v

Question 56:
A girl of mass 50 kg jumps out of a rowing boat of mass 300 kg on to the bank, with a
horizontal velocity of 3 m/s. With what velocity does the boat begin to move backwards ?
Solution :
Mass of the boat mb = 300 kg
Velocity of boat vb
Mass of girl mg = 50 kg
Velocity of girl vg = 3 m/s
Acc. to the law of conservation of momentum
mbvb=mgvg
300 x vb = 50 x 3

Question 57:
A truck of mass 500 kg moving at 4 m/s collides with another truck of mass 1500 kg moving
in the same direction at 2 m/s. What is their common velocity just after the collision if they
move off together ?
Solution :
Mass of first truck, m1= 500 kg
Speed of first truck, u1 = 4 m/s
Mass of second truck, m2 = 1500 kg



Speed of second truck, u2 =2 m/s
Combined mass of both trucks, m = 1500 + 500 = 2000 kg
Combined velocity v
Acc. to the law of conservation of momentum
m1u1 + m2u2 = mv
500 x 4 + 1500 x 2 = 2000 x v

Question 58:
A ball X of mass 1 kg travelling at 2 m/s has a head-on collision with an identical ball Y at rest.
X stops and Y moves off. Calculate the velocity of Y after the collision.
Solution :
Mass of the ball x, m1= 1 kg
Speed of ball x, u1 = 2 m/s
Mass of ball y, m2 = 1 kg
Speed of ball y, u2 =0 m/s (at rest)
Velocity of ball x after collision, v1 = 0 m/s
Velocity of ball y after collision, v2
Acc. to the law of conservation of momentum
m1u1 + m2u2 = m1v1 + m2v2
1 x 2 + 1 x 0 = 1 x 0 + 1 x v2

Question 59:
A heavy car A of mass 2000 kg travelling at 10 m/s has a head-on collision with a sports car B
of mass 500 kg. If both cars stop dead on colliding, what was the velocity of car B ?
Solution :
Mass of car A, m1= 2000 kg
Speed of car A, v1 = 10 m/s
Mass of car B, m2 = 500 kg
Speed of car B, v2
Acc to law of conservation of momentum
m1v1 = m2v2
2000 x 10 = 500 x v2



Question 60:
A man wearing a bullet-proof vest stands still on roller skates. The total mass is 80 kg. A bullet
of mass 20 grams is fired at 400 m/s. It is stopped by the vest and falls to the ground. What is
then the velocity of the man ?
Solution :
Mass of the man, m1= 80 kg
Speed of man, v1
Mass of bullet m2 = 20 g = 0.02 kg
Speed of bullet v2 = 400 m/s
Acc to law of conservation of momentum
m1v1 = m2v2
80 x v1 = 0.02 x 400



Is Matter Around Us Pure ?

Solution 01
False
Solution 02
Milk, Paint, Glass
Solution 03
Air is a mixture.
Solution 04
Mercury is a liquid metal and bromine is a liquid non-metal.
Solution 05
Sodium metal is soft and diamond is an extremely hard non-metal.
Solution 06
Diamond is a non-metal which is good conductor of electricity.
Solution 07
Mercury
Solution 08
Carbon is a solid non-metal, bromine is a liquid non-metal and chlorine is a gaseous non-
metal.
Solution 09
(a). Malleability
(b). Ductility
Solution 10
Non-metals show brittleness.
Solution 11
This means that metals can be drawn into thin sheets and can also be drawn into wires.

Solution 12
This means that non-metals break into pieces when they are hammered.
Solution 13
This means that metals make a ringing sound when we strike them.
Solution 14
This means that metals are shiny in nature.
Solution 15
Mixtures.



Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book Page No – 57
Solution 16
The given statement best describes a compound.
Solution 17
Copper is an element, water is a compound and air is a mixture.
Solution 18
Mixtures are generally heterogeneous in which there is a boundary separation between
different substituents.
Solutions are homogeneous mixtures in which no separation is visible between different
materials.
Solution 19
Metalloids
Solution 20
(a).An element is made up of only one kind of atoms.
(b).Brine is a mixture whereas alcohol is a compound.
(c).Brass is an alloy which is considered a mixture.
(d).The three important metalloids are boron ,silicon and germanium.
(e).The elements which are sonorous are called metals.
Solution 21
(i). H2O – Compound
(ii). He – Element
(iii). Cl2 – Element
(iv). CO – Compound
(v). Co – Element
Solution 22
Elements – Iron, Sulphur, Sodium and Carbon
Compounds – Iron sulphide, Chalk, Washing Soda and Urea
Solution 23
Sugar contains carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
Common salt contains sodium and chlorine.
Solution 24
A pure substance is one which is made up of only one kind of atoms or molecules.
Examples – Oxygen and sugar.
Solution 25
Two types of pure substances –
(i). Pure substance made up of same kind of atoms.
Example – Sulphur
(ii). Pure substance made up of same kind of molecules.
Example – Water
Solution 26
Ice, iron, hydrochloric acid, calcium oxide and mercury are the pure substances
Solution 27
Mixture is another name for impure substances.



Examples – Milk and sea-water.
Solution 28
Elements: Mercury, Iron, Diamond, Nitrogen, Graphite, Hydrogen, Oxygen and chlorine.
Solution 29
Air is a mixture because-
(i). Air can be separated into its constituents like oxygen, nitrogen, etc. by physical process of
fractional distillation.
(ii). Air shows the properties of all the gases present in it.
(iii). Liquid air does not have a fixed boiling point.
Water is compound because –
(i). Water cannot be separated into its constituents, hydrogen and oxygen by physical
methods.
(ii). Heat and light are given out when water is prepared by burning hydrogen in oxygen.
(iii). Water has standard b.p. of 100oC under standard atmospheric pressure.
Solution 30
Two solid elements at room temp. – Iron and copper
Two liquid elements at room temp. – Mercury and bromine
Two gaseous elements at room temp. – Hydrogen and oxygen
Solution 31
Hydrogen and oxygen cannot be split up into two or more simpler substances by applying
heat, light or electric energy.
Whereas, water can be split up into hydrogen and oxygen by applying electric energy, so it is
not an element.
Solution 32
All the elements can be divided into following three groups-
(i). Metals ; Iron and copper
(ii).Non-metals ; Carbon and sulphur
(iii).Metalloids ; Boron and silicon
Solution 33
Metals are malleable and ductile whereas non-metals are not.
Solution 34
(i). Malleability – Metals show this property but non-metals don’t.
(ii). Ductility – Metals show this property but non-metals don’t.
(iii). Electrical conductivity – Metals are good conductors of electricity whereas non-metals are
bad conductors except graphite.
Solution 35
Aluminium is malleable, ductile and sonorous, so it is a metal.
Solution 36
(a). Copper is ductile so it is used for making wires.
(b). Graphite is the only non-metal which conducts electricity so it can be used to make
electrodes.
Solution 37
We can check this by evaporating the given colourless liquid.
If nothing is left behind then the colourless liquid is pure water.
Solution 38
Sea-water and Soda-water.
Solution 39
Air is a mixture because-
(i). Air can be separated into its constituents like oxygen, nitrogen, etc. by physical process of
fractional distillation.
(ii). Air shows the properties of all the gases present in it.
(iii). Liquid air does not have a fixed boiling point.



Solution 40
Water is a compound because –
(i). Water cannot be separated into its constituents, hydrogen and oxygen by physical
methods.
(ii). Heat and light are given out when water is prepared by burning hydrogen in oxygen.
Solution 41
A compound is a substance made up of two or more elements chemically combined in a fixed
proportion by mass.
NaCl cannot be separated into its constituents by physical process and the properties of NaCl
is completely different from that of Na and Cl, so NaCl is a compound and not a mixture.
Solution 42
A mixture is a substance which consists of two or more elements or compounds not
chemically combined together.
As energy is neither evolved nor absorbed during the formation of sugar solution and a sugar
solution shows properties of both sugar and water so sugar solution is a mixture not a
compound.
Solution 43
Brass is a mixture because-
(i). It shows the properties of its constituents, copper and zinc.
(ii). It has a variable composition.
Solution 44

Solution 45
As energy is neither evolved nor absorbed during the formation of salt solution and a salt
solution shows properties of both salt and water so salt solution is a mixture not a compound.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book PAGE No 58
Solution 46
Similarity: In both the cases, the mixture can be separated into their constituents by physical
methods.
Difference: No separation is visible in the mixture of sugar and water whereas separation is
visible in mixture of sand and sand.
Solution 47
Evaporate both the liquids separately.
A pure compound will evaporate completely, leaving no residue whereas solution will not be
evaporated completely, i.e. some residue will be left behind.
Solution 48
(a). Iodine is a lustrous non-metal.



(b). Oxygen is a non-metal required for combustion.
(c). Allotrope of carbon forms good conductor of electricity.
That allotrope is graphite.
(d). Silicon
(e). Carbon
Solution 49
(a). Sodium
(b). Mercury
(c). Mercury
(d). Sodium
(e). Gold
Solution 50
Chlorine gas, Aluminium foil, Iodine vapour, Graphite, Sulphur powder, Diamond are not
compounds.
Solution 51
(a). Those mixtures in which the substances are completely mixed together and are
indistinguishable from one another, are called homogeneous mixtures. They have a uniform
composition throughout its mass. All the homogeneous mixtures are called solutions.
Examples- Sugar solution, salt solution, copper sulphate solution, etc.
Those mixtures in which the substances remain separate and one substance is spread
throughout the other substance as small particles, droplets or bubbles, are called
heterogeneous mixtures. Heterogeneous mixture does not have a uniform composition
throughout its mass.
Example- Starch solution, soap solution.
(b). Homogeneous mixtures – Soda water, air, vinegar, alcohol and water mixture, sugar and
water mixture, Copper sulphate solution.
Heterogeneous mixture – Wood, petrol and water mixture, chalk and water mixture.
Solution 52
(a).(i).Elements – An element is a substance which cannot be split up into two or more simpler
substances by the usual chemical methods of applying heat, light or electricity.
Ex. Hydrogen, Oxygen
(ii). Compounds – A compound is a substance made up of two or more elements chemically
combined in a fixed proportion by mass.
Ex. Sodium chloride, calcium carbonate
(iii). Mixtures – A mixture is a substance which consists of two or more elements or
compounds not chemically combined together.
(b). Elements – Gold, Diamond, Graphite
Compounds – Common salt, Sea water, Marble
Mixtures – Brass, Sand, Petroleum, Chalk, Air
Solution 53
(i). METALS – A metal is an element that is malleable, ductile and conducts electricity.
Example – Iron, Copper
(ii). NON-METALS – A non metal is an element that is neither malleable, nor ductile and does
not conducts electricity.
Example – Carbon, Sulphur
(iii). METALLOIDS – The elements which show some properties of metals and some other
properties of non-metals are called metalloids.
Example – Boron, Silicon, Helium, Magnesium, Copper
(b). Metals – Mercury, Sodium,
Non-metals – Diamond, Sulphur, Iodine, Carbon, Boron
Metalloids – Silicon, Germanium
Solution 54



(a). Mixtures – A mixture is a substance which consists of two or more elements or
compounds not chemically combined together.
Examples – Air, gun powder.
(b). Homogeneous mixtures- Those mixtures in which the substance are completely mixed
together and are indistinguishable from one another, are called homogeneous mixtures.
Examples- Sugar solution, copper sulphate solution.
Those mixtures in which the substances remain separate and one substance is spread
throughout the other substance as small particles, droplets or bubbles, are called
heterogeneous mixtures.
Example- Starch solution, soap solution.
(c). Other name for homogeneous mixtures is SOLUTIONS.
Solution 55
(a). Three general classes of matter are elements, compounds and mixtures.
Element – Hydrogen
Compound – Sodium chloride
Mixtures – Salt solution
(b).

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book PAGE No 59

Solution 71
Steam does not belong to the set. This is because all other are elements while steam is a
compound.
Solution 72
(a). B is a mixture (Fe + S)
(b). C is a compound (Iron sulphide)
(c). (i). D is hydrogen sulphide gas
(ii). E is hydrogen gas
(d). Gas D has a rotten egg like smell.
(e). Gas E burns with a ‘pop’ sound.
Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book Page No: 60

Solution 73
(a). X must be a mixture. Salt solution is a substance like X.
(b). Y must be an element. Oxygen is a substance like Y.
(c). Z must be a compound. Water is a substance like Z.
(d). Formation of Z (a compound) involves absorption or release of an appreciable amount of
energy.
(e). The three groups are metals, non-metals and metalloids.
Solution 74
(a). Group of materials P is elements.
(b). Q is a non-metal. Example – Carbon and sulphur.
(c). R is a metal. Example – Copper and Aluminium.



(d). S is a metalloid. Example – Boron and Silicon.
(e). R (metals) are malleable and ductile.
Solution 75
(a). B could be an element. It is mercury.
(b). C could be the mixture. It is a salt solution.
(c). A could be a compound. It is an alcohol.
(d). Solid D is Sodium Chloride.
(e). Liquid E is water.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book Page No 79
Solution 1
(a)Solution
(b)Suspension
Solution 2
Solution
Solution 3
Soap solution will scatter light because in true solution i.e. sugar solution, the solute particles
are so small that they cannot scatter light rays while in soap solution particles are big enough
to scatter light.
Solution 4
Heterogeneous
Solution 5
Percentage method
Solution 6
Mass of water = Mass of solution – Mass of salt (solute)
= 100 – 15 = 85 g
Solution 7

So, Volume of solution = 100 ml
Volume of water = Volume of solution – Volume of solute (alcohol)
= 100 – 12 = 88 ml
Solution 8
(a)
A 5 per cent sugar solution means that 5g of sugar is dissolved in 95 g of water.
Solution 9
(a)
A 15% alcohol solution means 15mL alcohol and 85mL water
Solution 10

Solution 11
Given mass of urea = 16 g
And, mass of solution = 120 g
So,



Solution 12
Given volume of alcohol = 5.6 mL
And, volume of water = 75 mL
So, volume of solution = 75 mL + 5.6 mL = 80.6 mL

Solution 13
Given volume of acetone = 25 mL
And, volume of solution = 150 mL

Solution 14
When the temperature of a saturated sugar solution is increased, it becomes unsaturated.
Solution 15
Unsaturated solution contains less solute at a given temperature and pressure.
Solution 16
Physical change-Vaporisation(water changes to water vapour or steam)
Chemical change-Electrolysis(i.e.water forms hydrogen and oxygen)
Solution 17
(a)True
(b)False

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book PAGE NO 80
Solution 18
Colloid
Solution 19
Soap solution
Solution 20
(a) Colloidal; true
(b) Heterogeneous; centrifugation
Solution 21
(a)Solute-The substance which is dissolved in a liquid to make a solution is called as solute.
(b)Solvent-The liquid in which solute is dissolved is known as solvent.
Solution 22
A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances whereas a colloid is a kind of
solution in which the size of solute particles is intermediate between those in true solutions
and those in suspensions.
Solution 23
A colloid is a kind of solution in which the size of solute particles is intermediate between
those in true solutions and those in suspensions whereas a suspension is a heterogeneous
mixture in which the small particles of a solid are spread throughout a liquid without dissolving
in it.
Solution 24



A true solution does not scatter a beam of light passing through it but a colloidal solution
scatters a beam of light passing through it and renders its path visible. A true solution is a
homogeneous mixture of two or more substances whereas a colloidal solution is a kind of
solution in which the size of solute particles is intermediate between those in true solutions
and those in suspensions and is a heterogeneous mixture.
Solution 25
True Solutions – Salt solution and sugar solution
Colloidal Solution – Starch solution, Ink, Blood
Solution 26
The given solution is taken in a beaker. Then, a strong beam of light is allowed to fall on the
solution from one side of the beaker in a dark room. If the beam of light is visible in the
solution, then it is a colloidal solution.
Solution 27
The path of light beam is illuminated and becomes visible.
Solution 28
A true solution can be distinguished from a colloidal solution by experimenting Tyndall effect.
A true solution does not scatter a beam of light passing through it but a colloidal solution
scatters a beam of light passing through it.
Solution 29
The particles of a suspension cannot pass through a filter paper whereas particles of colloids
can easily pass through filter paper.
Colloidal solutions are quite stable whereas suspensions are very unstable.
Solution 30
Both the given solutions will be kept stationary in different beakers for some time.
The beaker in which the dissolved particles settle down after some time is a suspension and
another one is a solution.
Solution 31
Starch solution and milk will show Tyndall effect.
This is because in a milk solution and starch solution (colloidal solutions) the size of solute
particles is big enough to scatter the light passing through it.
Solution 32
Types of solution-
(i). Solid in solid.
Example- Brass
(ii). Solid in a liquid
Example- Tincture of iodine
(iii). Liquid in liquid
Example- ethanoic acid
(iv). Gas in a liquid
Example- CO2 in water
(v). gas in gas
Example- Air
Solution 33
Solutions – Brine
Suspensions – Chalk water mixture, milk of magnesia, Muddy river water
Colloids – Milk, blood, ink, shaving cream, smoke in air, soda water
Solution 34
(a). Sol – Sol is a colloid in which tiny solid particles are dispersed in a liquid medium.
Examples are ink and soap solution
(b). Aerosol- Aerosol is a colloid in which a solid or liquid is dispersed in a gas. Examples are
hairspray and fog.
(c). Emulsion – An emulsion is a colloid in which minute droplets of one liquid are dispersed in



another liquid which is not miscible with it. Examples are milk and butter.
(d). Foam- A foam is a colloid in which a gas is dispersed in a liquid medium. Examples are
soap bubbles and shaving cream.
Solution 35
The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute present in given quantity of the
solution.
Solution 36
If a saturated solution is heated to a higher temperature, then it becomes unsaturated.
If a saturated solution is cooled to a lower temperature, then some of its dissolved solute will
separate out in the form of solid crystals.
Solution 37
According to question-
21.5 g of NaCl dissolves in 60 g of water.
So, amount of NaCl which gets dissolved in 100 g of water = 21.5 x 100 / 60 = 35.8 g
Thus, the solubility of NaCl is 35.8 g at 25oC.
Solution 38
According to question-
9.72 g of KCl dissolves in 30 g of water.
So, amount of KCl which gets dissolved in 100 g of water = 9.72 x 100/30 = 32.4 g
Thus, the solubility of KCl = 32.4 g
Solution 39
i. Cooking of food – Chemical change
ii. Boiling of water – Physical change
iii. Cutting of trees – Physical change
iv. Dissolving salt in water – Physical change
v. Digestion of food – Chemical change
vi. Melting of ice- Physical change
Solution 40
(a) Burning of magnesium wire – Chemical change
(b) Freezing of water – Physical change
(c) Rusting of iron – Chemical change
(d) Glowing of electric bulb – Physical change
Solution 41
(a) Formation of curd from milk – Chemical chang
(b) Condensation of steam – Physical change
(c) Growth of plant – Chemical change
(d) Breaking of a glass tumbler – Physical change

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book PAGE No 81
Solution 42
Physical change – Sublimation of solid, Formation of clouds, making of fruit salad from raw
fruits, dissolving CO2 in water
Chemical change – Decomposition of water into H2 and O2 by passing electric current
Solution 43
Physical change – Melting of candle wax, mixing of iron filings and sand, breaking a piece of
chalk, cutting a piece of paper
Chemical change – Burning of candle wax, burning of wood, burning of piece of paper
Solution 44
When sea water is a mixture of dissolved salts and water only, it is homogeneous solution.
And if sea water contains suspended impurities like decayed plants or animal material, etc.
then it is called heterogeneous solution.
Solution 45



Sugar solution, Salt solution, copper sulphate solution and ammonium chloride solution do not
show Tyndall effect.
Solution 46
(a). The change in which no new substance is formed is called a physical change.
Example- Melting of candle wax, mixing of iron filings and sand
(b).The change in which new substance is formed is called a chemical change.
Example- Burning of candle wax, burning of wood
Solution 47

(b). Chemical change – Coal burning in air, making of cake
Physical change- A glass bottle breaking, wool being knitted into a sweater.
Solution 48
(a). The maximum amount of a solute which can be dissolved in 100 g of a solvent at a
specified temperature is known as the solubility of that solute in that solvent .
The solubility of solids in liquids is directly proportional to temperature whereas the solubility
of gases in liquids is inversly proportional to temperature.
(b). This statement means that 100 g of water can dissolve a maximum of 20.7 g of copper
sulphate at 20oC.
(c). The solubility of solids in liquids increases on increasing the temperature and decreases
on decreasing the temperature.
Solution 49
(a). A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances.
Example- Salt solution, metal alloys.
(b). A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture in which the small particles of a solid are spread
throughout a liquid without dissolving in it.
Example- Muddy-water, Milk of magnesia.
(c). A colloid is a kind of solution in which the size of solute particles is intermediate between
those in true solutions and those in suspensions.
Example- Soap solution, milk.
Solution 50
(a). A solution in which no more solute can be dissolved at that temperature is called a
saturated solution while a solution in which more quantity of solute can be dissolved without
raising its temperature is called an unsaturated solution.
To test the saturation or unsaturation of a solution, more solute may be added to the solution.
If that solute gets dissolved in the solution then the solution will be unsaturated.
To test whether a given solution is saturated or not, add some more solute to the solution and
try to dissolve it by stirring. If solute does not dissolve in the given solution, then it will be a
saturated solution.
(b). Take some water in a beaker and heat it slowly with the help of burner. Now, start adding
sodium chloride salt to the hot water with a spoon and stir it with a glass rod continuously so
that sodium chloride goes on dissolving in water. Take the temperature of water up to 25oC
and then keeping this temperature constant, go on adding sodium chloride till no more sodium
chloride dissolves in it and some undissolved crystals will be left at the bottom. The contents
of the beaker are now filtered and the clear solution obtained is the saturated solution of
sodium chloride at 25oC.



If the temperature is lowered from 25oC to 10oC, then some of the crystals of sodium chloride
will separate out from the solution in the form of solute crystals.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book PAGE N0 82
Solution 66
Indigestion mixtures are suspensions so there is an instruction written on the bottle of these
mixtures “SHAKE IT WELL BEFORE USE”. This is because the particles of indigestion mixture
i.e. suspensions are unstable and settle down at the bottom of the bottle after some time.
Solution 67
(a) Mixtures like A are known as suspensions.
(b) Mixtures like B are known as colloids.
(c) Mixtures like C are known as true solutions.
(d) The phenomenon existed by A and B which occurs on passing a beam of light through
them is called Tyndall effect.
(e) (i) Chalk-water mixture is like A.
(ii) Soap solution is a mixture like B.
(iii) Salt solution is a mixture like C.
Solution 68
(a) When solid A is dissolved in water, chemical change takes place. This is because the
properties of products B and C are entirely different from those of solid A and water and a lot
of heat and energy is evolved in the reaction.
(b) Physical change occurs when solid D is dissolved in water. This is because the product E
shows the properties of both, solid D and water.
(c) Sodium metal could behave like solid A.
Product B is sodium hydroxide.
Product C is hydrogen.
(d) Solid D is ammonium chloride.
(e) D can be recovered from E by evaporation.
Solution 69
(a) Solution like X are known as unsaturated solution.
(b) Solution like Y are known as saturated solution.
(c) If solution Y at 30oC is cool down to 10oC by keeping the beaker in crushed ice, then some
of the dissolved solid will separate out from the solution and settle at the bottom of the beaker
as crystals. This is because the solubility of solid decreases on cooling.
(d) Solubility is the term used to denote the amount of solid dissolved in 100 grams of water in
a solution.
PAGE NO 83
Solution 70
According to question:
Solubility at 40oC = 41 g
But, solubility = solid dissolved in 100 grams of water in a solution
So, mass of ammonium chloride needed to make a saturated solution of ammonium chloride
in 50 g of water at 40oC= 41/2 g = 20.5 g

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book PAGE NO 105
Solution 1
Carbon disulphide
Solution 2
Sublimation
Solution 3
Sublimation
Solution 4



Sublimation
Solution 5
Camphor undergoes sublimation.
Solution 6
Electromagnet.
Solution 7
Iodine undergoes sublimation.
Solution 8
Fractional distillation
Solution 9
Difference in their boiling point.
Solution 10
Acetone and water
Solution 11
Kerosene and water.
Solution 12
(a)False
(b)False
Solution 13
Air
Solution 14
Fractional distillation of liquid air.
Solution 15
He should choose magnetic separation method to separate iron nails from saw-dust.
Solution 16
Salt and camphor.
Solution 17
Mixture of common salt and water.
Solution 18
By filtration.
Solution 19
Filtration
Solution 20
Evaporation
Solution 21
Centrifugation
Solution 22
Centrifugation is used to separate cream from milk.
Solution 23
Filtration
Solution 24
Fractional distillation
Solution 25
Separating funnel
Solution 26
Difference in the densities of oil and water enable their separation by a separating funnel.
Solution 27
(a)Evaporation
(b)Crystallization
Solution 28
Crystallization
Solution 29



(a) Evaporation
(b) Paper chromatography

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book PAGE No 106
Solution 30
Centrifugation
Solution 31
Chromatography
Solution 32
(a) Fractional distillation
(b) Separating funnel
(c) Fractional distillation
(d) Boiling points
(e) Boiling points
(f) Centrifugation
(g) Magnet
Solution 33
Sugar is soluble in water whereas sand is insoluble in water. The difference in their solubility is
used to separate them. The mixture of sand and sugar is dissolved in water, then it is filtered
with the help of filter paper. Sand remains as residue on the filter paper while sugar solution is
obtained as filtrate.The filtrate is then evaporated to get crystals of sugar.
Solution 34
The difference in the solubility of salt and sand in water is used to separate them from their
mixture.
Solution 35
Salt is soluble in water whereas sand is insoluble in water. The difference in their solubility is
used to separate them. The mixture of sand and salt is dissolved in water, then it is filtered
with the help of filter paper. Sand remains as residue on the filter paper while salt solution is
obtained as filtrate .The filtrate is then evaporated to get crystals of salt.
Solution 36
Sugar is soluble in alcohol but salt is insoluble in alcohol, so a mixture of sugar and salt can be
separated by using alcohol as solvent.
Solution 37
Sodium chloride is soluble in water whereas sand is insoluble in water. The difference in their
solubility is used to separate them. The mixture of sand and sodium chloride is dissolved in
water, then it is filtered with the help of filter paper. Sand remains as residue on the filter paper
while sodium chloride solution is obtained as filtrate .The filtrate is then evaporated to get
crystals of sodium chloride.
Solution 38
Potash alum is soluble in water whereas sand is insoluble in water. The difference in their
solubility is used to separate them. The mixture of sand and potash alum is dissolved in water,
then it is filtered with the help of filter paper. Sand remains as residue on the filter paper while
potash alum solution is obtained as filtrate .The filtrate is then evaporated to get crystals of
potash alum.
Solution 39
Sulphur is soluble in carbon disulphide whereas sodium chloride is insoluble in carbon
disulphide.The mixture of sulphur and sodium chloride is shaken with carbon
disulphide.Sulphur dissolves in carbon disulphide whereas sodium chloride remains
undissolved. The solution is then filtered,sodium chloride is obtained as residue.On
evaporating the filtrate ,carbon disulphide solvent is eliminated and solid sulphur remains
behind.
Solution 40



Mixture of iodine and common salt is heated. Iodine sublimes on heating leaving behind
common salt and can be recovered in the form of sublimate by cooling its vapours.
Solution 41
Mixture of camphor and sand is heated. Camphor sublimes on heating leaving behind sand
and can be recovered in the form of sublimate by cooling its vapours.
Solution 42
Mixture of iron filings and powdered carbon can be separated by using magnet.A horse-shoe
magnet is moved on the surface of the mixture.The iron filings are attracted by the
magnet,they cling to the poles of the magnet and get separated. This process is repeated a
number of times till complete separation of iron filings is done.
Solution 43
Mixture of iron filings and powdered carbon can be separated by using magnet.A horse-shoe
magnet is moved on the surface of the mixture.The iron filings are attracted by the
magnet,they cling to the poles of the magnet and get separated. This process is repeated a
number of times till complete separation of iron filings is done.
Solution 44
In factories, scrap iron is separated from the heap of waste materials by using big
electromagnets fitted to a crane.When a crane fitted with a powerful electromagnet is lowered
on to the heap of waste materials, then the scrap iron objects present in the heap cling to the
electromagnet. The crane is then moved up and away to drop these scrap iron objects at a
separate place.
Solution 45
In industries, the impurity of iron present in several substances is removed by the use of
magnets. Iron objects stick to the magnet leaving behind other objects.
Solution 46
Mixture of iron pins and sand can be separated by using magnet.A horse-shoe magnet is
moved on the surface of the mixture.The iron pins are attracted by the magnet,they cling to
the poles of the magnet and get separated. This process is repeated a number of times till
complete separation of iron pins is achieved.
Solution 47
At first, the mixture of common salt, sulphur powder and sand is shaken with carbon
disulphide. Sulphur dissolves in carbon disulphide whereas common salt and sand remain
undissolved. The solution is then filtered, common salt and sand mixture is obtained as
residue. On evaporating the filtrate, carbon disulphide solvent is eliminated and solid sulphur
remains behind. Now, the common salt and sand mixture is shaken with water. Common salt
gets dissolved in water .The solution is then filtered, sand is obtained as residue. The filtrate is
then evaporated to get crystals of common salt.
Solution 48
The mixture of water, kerosene and sand is filtered with the help of filter paper first. Sand
remains as residue on the filter paper while mixture of water and kerosene is obtained as
filtrate .The mixture of water and kerosene is then put in separating funnel and allowed to
stand for sometime. The mixture separates into two layers according to the difference in the
densities of water and kerosene. Water is heavier than kerosene. So,water forms lower layer
while kerosene forms upper layer.On opening the stop clock of separating funnel,the lower
layer of water comes out first and collected in beaker leaving behind kerosene in the
separating funnel.
Solution 49
The mixture of common salt,sand and ammonium chloride will be heated first.Ammonium
chloride sublimes on heating and can be recovered in the form of sublimate by cooling its
vapours leaving behind mixture of common salt and sand.Salt is soluble in water whereas
sand is insoluble in water.The mixture of sand and salt is dissolved in water, then it is filtered
with the help of filter paper. Sand remains as residue on the filter paper while salt solution is



obtained as filtrate .The filtrate is then evaporated to get crystals of salt.
Solution 50
A horse-shoe magnet is moved on the surface of the mixture of camphor,common salt and
iron nails.The iron nails are attracted by the magnet, they cling to the poles of the magnet and
get separated. This process is repeated a number of times till complete separation of iron
nails occur leaving behind mixture of camphor and common salt. Mixture of camphor and
common salt is heated. Camphor sublimes on heating leaving behind common salt and can be
recovered in the form of sublimate by cooling its vapours
Solution 51
The mixture of water, groundnut oil and common salt is put in a separating funnel and allowed
to stand for sometime. The mixture separates into two layers according to the densities of
water and groundnut oil. Water is heavier than groundnut oil. So, water forms lower layer while
groundnut oil forms upper layer. On opening the stop clock of separating funnel, the lower
layer of water comes out first and collected in beaker leaving behind groundnut oil in the funel.
Now, solution of water and common salt is heated. Water gets evaporated leaving behind solid
common salt.
Solution 52
Mixture of chalk powder,iron filings and naphthalene can be separated by using magnet and
then by sublimation. A horse-shoe magnet is moved on the surface of the mixture.The iron
filings are attracted by the magnet, they cling to the poles of the magnet and get separated.
This process is repeated a number of times till complete separation of iron filings occur
leaving behind mixture of chalk powder and naphthalene. Then, mixture of chalk powder and
naphthalene is heated.Naphthalene sublimes on heating leaving behind chalk powder and can
be recovered in the form of sublimate by cooling its vapours.
Solution 53
Mixture of iodine, iron filings and salt can be separated by using magnet and then by
sublimation. A horse-shoe magnet is moved on the surface of the mixture.The iron filings are
attracted by the magnet, they cling to the poles of the magnet and get separated. This process
is repeated a number of times till complete separation of iron filings occur leaving behind
mixture of iodine and salt. Then, mixture of iodine and salt is heated. Iodine sublimes on
heating leaving behind salt and can be recovered in the form of sublimate by cooling its
vapours.
Solution 54
Mixture of iron filings,chalk powder and common salt can be separated by using magnet
first.A horse-shoe magnet is moved on the surface of the mixture.The iron filings are attracted
by the magnet,they cling to the poles of the magnet and get separated. This process is
repeated a number of times till complete separation of iron filings occur leaving behind
mixture of chalk powder and common salt.The mixture of chalk powder and common salt is
then dissolved in water and then filtered with the help of filter paper. Chalk powder remains as
residue on the filter paper while common salt solution is obtained as filtrate .The filtrate is
then evaporated to get crystals of common salt.
Solution 55
Mixture of common salt, sand and iron filings can be separated by using magnet first. A horse-
shoe magnet is moved on the surface of the mixture. The iron filings are attracted by the
magnet, they cling to the poles of the magnet and get separated. This process is repeated a
number of times till complete separation of iron filings occur leaving behind mixture of
common salt and sand.The mixture of common salt and sand is then dissolved in water and
then filtered with the help of filter paper. Sand remains as residue on the filter paper while
common salt solution is obtained as filtrate .The filtrate is then evaporated to get crystals of
common salt.
Solution 56
The mixture of water and kerosene is put in separating funnel and allowed to stand for



sometime. The mixture separates into two layers according to the densities of water and
kerosene. Water is heavier than kerosene.So, water forms lower layer while kerosene forms
upper layer. On opening the stop clock of separating funnel, the lower layer of water comes out
first and collected in beaker leaving behind kerosene.

Fig. Separation of kerosene oil and water mixture by separating funnel
Solution 57
The mixture of mustard oil and water is put in separating funnel and allowed to stand for
sometime.The mixture separates into two layers according to the densities of water and
mustard oil. Water is heavier than mustard oil. So,water forms lower layer while mustard oil
forms upper layer. On opening the stop clock of separating funnel, the lower layer of water
comes out first and collected in beaker leaving behind mustard oil.
Solution 58
The mixture of cooking oil(groundnut oil) and water is put in separating funnel and allowed to
stand for sometime.The mixture separates into two layers according to the densities of water
and groundnut oil. Water is heavier than groundnut oil. So,water forms lower layer while
groundnut oil forms upper layer. On opening the stop clock of separating funnel,the lower layer
of water comes out first and collected in beaker leaving behind groundnut oil.
Solution 59
Mercury, oil and water are immiscible liquids and have different densities. Mixture of mercury,
oil and water will be put in separating funnel and allowed to stand for sometimes. The mixture
separates into three layers according to the densities of mercury, oil and water. On opening the
stop clock of separating funnel, the lower layer formed by mercury comes out first and
collected in beaker leaving behind other two layers. Similarly, again on opening the stop clock
of separating funnel, the lower layer of water comes out first and collected in beaker leaving
behind oil in the funnel.
Solution 60
Sulphur is soluble in carbon disulphide whereas iron filing is insoluble in carbon disulphide.The
mixture of sulphur and iron filing is shaken with carbon disulphide.Sulphur dissolves in carbon
disulphide whereas iron filings remain undissolved. The solution is then filtered, iron filing is
obtained as residue.On evaporating the filtrate, carbon disulphide solvent is eliminated and
solid sulphur remains behind.
Solution 61
Centrifugation is used to separate cream from milk.Milk is a suspension of tiny droplets of oil
in a watery liquid.It is put in closed container in a big centrifuge machine.When machine is
switched on,milk is rotated at very high speed in its container.The cream being lighter floats
over the skimmed milk and then can be removed.
Solution 62
Impure copper sulphate is dissolved in minimum amount of water in a china dish to make
copper sulphate solution. It is then filtered to remove insoluble impurities. Now, copper
sulphate solution is heated gently on a water bath to evaporate water and a saturated solution
is obtained. Then heating is stopped and saturated solution of copper sulphate is allowed to



cool slowly. Crystals of pure copper sulphate will be formed leaving behind impurities. These
crystals are then separated and dried.
Solution 63
Crystallisation is better method for recovering sugar from sugar solution than evaporation
because-
(a)Sugar decomposes or get charred on heating to dryness during evaporation.There is no
such problem in crystallization.
(b)The soluble impurities do not get removed in the process of evaporation. But such
impurities get removed in crystallization.
Solution 64
Chromatography is a technique of separating two or more dissolved solids which are present
in a solution in very small quantities.Its two applications are-
(a)Chromatography is used to separate solutions of coloured substances(dyes and pigments).
(b)Chromatography is used to separate small amounts of products of chemical reactions.
Solution 65
(a)Water and kerosene mixture can be separated by using a separating funnel because these
are immiscible liquids and they have different densities.
(b)Water and acetone mixture can not be separated by by using a separating funnel because
these are miscible liquids.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book PAGE NO 107
Solution 66
The mixture of common salt and ammonium chloride is taken in a china dish and placed on a
tripod stand. The china dish is covered with an inverted glass funnel. A loose cotton plug is put
in the upper, open end of the funnel to prevent the ammonium chloride vapours from escaping
into the atmosphere. The china dish is heated by using a burner. On heating the mixture,
ammonium chloride changes into white vapours. These vapours rise up and get converted into
solid ammonium chloride on coming in contact with the cold, inner walls of the funnel. In this
way, pure ammonium chloride collects on the inner sides of the funnel in the form of a
sublimate and can be removed. Common salt does not change into vapours on heating, so it
remains behind in the china dish and can be separated out.

Fig. Separation of mixture of common salt and ammonium chloride by sublimation
Ammonium chloride sublimes on heating whereas common salt does not sublime on heating.



So, we can separate ammonium chloride from a mixture of common salt and ammonium
chloride by the process of sublimation.
Solution 67
A mixture of common salt and water can be separated completely by the process of
distillation. The distillation can be used to separate a liquid from dissolved non-volatile solids.
The salt water mixture is taken in the distillation flask A and heated. Some porcelain pieces are
put in the distillation flask to avoid bumping of the solution due to uneven heating. On heating,
water forms vapours which rise up and come out through the side tube B of the distillation
flask, and go into water condenser C. Cold water from tap is circulated through the outer tube
of condenser for cooling the vapours. The hot vapours get cooled in the condenser to form
pure water (i.e. distilled water) which trickles down from the condenser and collects in the
beaker D. Since the salt is non-volatile, so it remains behind in the distillation flask.

Fig. Separation of mixture of salt and water by distillation
Solution 68
In cities, drinking water is supplied from water works where river or lake water is made free
from suspended solid substances and germs. In water works, the methods like sedimentation,
decantation, loading, filtration and chlorination etc. are used to remove undesirable materials
from water. The source of water supply in a city is either a nearby river or lake (reservoir), from
there it is pumped into ‘sedimentation tank’. Here it is allowed to stand for sometime so that
many of insoluble substances present in water settle down at bottom of the tank. From there,
it is sent to a ‘loading tank’ where some alum is added to water. Here suspended clay particles
in water get loaded with alum particles, become heavy and settle down at the bottom of the
tank. Then, it is passed through ‘filtration tank’. It has three layers: fine sand layer at top,
coarse sand layer in middle and gravel as the bottom layer. These act as filters and even the
small suspended particles get removed when water passes through these layers. Then, the
clear water is passed into a chlorination tank. Here, chlorine is added to water to kill the germs
present in it. Now, the clean and disinfected water is pumped by pumping station into high
storage tanks and from there, it is supplied to homes and factories through the network of big
and small pipes.



Fig. Water purification process at water works
Solution 69
(a) Fractional distillation is the process of separating two or more miscible liquids (liquids
which mix together in all proportions and form a single layer) by distillation, the distillate being
collected in fractions boiling at different temperatures. The separation of two liquids by
fractional distillation depends on the difference in their boiling points. It is carried out by using
a fractionating column.
Fractionating column is a long vertical glass tube filled with glass beads. The glass beads
provide a large surface area for hot vapours to cool and condens repeatedly. It provides
different temperature zones inside it, the highest temperature being at the bottom of the
column and the lowest temperature near its top. It is fitted in the neck of the distillation flask.
(b)

Fig. Separation of mixture of alcohol and water by fractional distillation
Solution 70
(a)Air is mixture of gases like nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, helium, neon, krypton,
xeon etc. The various gases of air are separated from one another by fractional distillation of
liquid air. This separation is based on the fact that different gases of air have different boiling
points(in liquid form).
The air is first filtered to remove dust, then water vapour and carbon dioxide are removed. Air
is compressed to a high pressure and then cooled. The cooled air is then allowed to expand
quickly into a chamber through a jet. This cools the air even more. This process of
compression, cooling and rapid expansion of air is repeated again and again to make the air
more and more cool so that it becomes liquid air. Now, the liquid air is fed into a tall
fractionating column and warmed up slowly.



Liquid nitrogen has lowest boiling point of -196oC.So, on warming, it boils off first to form
nitrogen gas and is collected at the upper part of the fractional distillation column. Liquid
argon has a slightly higher boiling point of -186oC. So, it boils off next and collected as argon
gas in the middle part of fractional distillation column. Liquid oxygen has a still higher boiling
point of -183 oC. So, liquid oxygen boils off last and collected as oxygen gas at the bottom of
fractional distillation column.
(b)

Fig. Separation of major gases of air

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Text Book PAGE NO 108
Solution 86
(a) Y will be collected from near the bottom of the fractional distillation column because it has
highest boiling point of -183oC.
(b) Z will be collected from the top part of the fractional distillation column because it has
lowest boiling point of -196oC.
(c) X will be collected from the middle part of the fractional distillation column because it has a
boiling point of -186oC which is lower than that of Y but higher than that of Z.
(d) X is liquid argon; Y is liquid oxygen; Z is liquid nitrogen.
Solution 87
(a) We will use fractional distillation to separate a mixture of A and B.
(b) We will use separating funnel to separate a mixture of B and C.
(c) (i) Alcohol would behave like A.
(ii) Water would behave like B.
(iii) Oil would behave like C.
Solution 88
(a) P is sand; Q is common salt; R is iron fillings; S is ammonium chloride.
(b) We first separate R (iron filings) by using a magnet to attract them. Then, separate S
(ammonium chloride) by sublimation. Now, we shake P(sand)and Q(common salt) with water
and filter. P(sand) is obtained as residue. Now, we evaporate filtrate to dryness to obtain
Q(common salt).
Solution 89
(a) X is alcohol.
(b) Y is iodine.
(c) Process Z is called sublimation
(d) Process used to recover both the components alcohol and iodine from tincture of iodine is
distillation.
(e) The process used to recover only component Y from tincture of iodine is evaporation.
Solution 90
(a) (i) Constituent A could be sulphur.
(ii) Liquid D could be carbon disulphide.
(b) (i) Constituent B could be copper sulphate.
(ii) Liquid E could be water.



(c) Liquid C could be vegetable oil.
(d) Filter the mixture of A, B and C. C(oil) being liquid will be obtained as a filtrate. Residue
consists of A(sulphur) and B(copper sulphate). Add water to the residue mixture, shake and
filter. A(sulphur) is obtained as residue. Now, evaporate filtrate to obtain B(copper sulphate).



The Fundamental Unit Of Life – Cell
PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page No – 116.

Solution SAQ – 1:

Prokaryotic Cell:
1. Cell size is generally small.
2. Only a single chromosome is present.
3. Nucleolus is absent.
4. Cell division takes place by fission or budding.

Eukaryotic Cell:
1. Cell is generally large.
2. More than one chromosome is present.
3. Nucleolus is present.
4. Cell division takes place by mitotic or meiotic.

Solution SAQ – 2:

Organs:
1. They are found in multicellular organisms.
2. They are large sized.
3. They may be external or internal to the body of organisms.
4. Organs coordinate to form organ systems, while organ systems form the body of an
organism.

Organelles:
1. They are found in all eukaryotic cells.
2. They are very small sized.
3. They are mostly internal.
4. Organelles coordinate to produce the cell.

Solution SAQ – 4:

Light microscope:
1. It uses glass lenses.
2. It uses a beam of light to illuminate the object.
3. Internal vacuum is not required.

Electron microscope:



1. It uses electromagnets.
2. It uses a beam of electrons instead of light.
3. Internal vacuum is essential.

Solution SAQ – 5:

Robert Hooke examined a thin slice of cork under a self-designed crude microscope and
observed that the cork resembled the structure of a honey comb. The latter consisted of many
tiny compartments. Hooke called them cellulae (Singular cellula), now termed cells. Cellula is a
Latin name which means a ‘little room’. Such rooms were also present in monasteries.

Solution SAQ – 6:
There are two types of protein molecules: Intrinsic proteins, which completely covers the lipid
bilayer and extrinsic proteins, which occur either on the outer surface or on the inner surface of
the lipid membrane.

Solution SAQ – 7:
Its major function is to hold cellular contents and control passage of materials in and out of the
cell.

Solution SAQ – 8:
In amoeba, oxygen (O2) enters the cell by the process of diffusion when the level or
concentration of O2 inside the cell decreases.

Solution SAQ – 9:
Put dried raisins and apricots in pure water and leave them for some time. Then place them
into a concentrated Solution of sugar or salt. Each one of them gains water and swells when
placed in pure water due to endosmosis. When such swollen raisins/apricots are placed in the
concentrated Solution, each of them loses, water, and consequently shrinks again (due to
exosmosis).

Solution SAQ – 10:

Diffusion:
1. Diffusion can occur in any medium.
2. The diffusing molecules may be solids, liquids or gases.
3. Semipermeable membrane is not required.
4. An equilibrium in the free energy of diffusion molecules is achieved in the system.

Osmosis:
1. It occurs only in liquid medium.



2. It involves movement of solvent molecules only.
3. Semipermeable membrane is required.
4. Equilibrium in the free energy of solvent molecules is never achieved.

Solution SAQ – 11:
Endocytosis is the ingestion of material by the cells through the plasma membrane. It is a
collective term that describes three similar processes: phagocytosis (cell eating), potocytosis
(cell drinking) and receptor-mediated endocytosis. These processes are pathways to specifically
internalize solid particles, small molecules ion, and macromolecules, respectively. All of them
require energy, so they may be regarded as different forms of active transport.
Solution SAQ – 12:

(i) When eukaryotic cells are placed in hypotonic Solution, the water molecules will enter into
the cell and the cell will swell up.

(ii) If eukaryotic cells are placed in hypertonic Solution, the water molecules will come out of
the cell and the cell with shrink.

(iii) If the eukaryotic cell is placed in isotonic Solution, the amount of water molecule will
remain the same; it will neither move out nor will go inside. The cell will remain same sized.

Solution SAQ – 13:
(a) Ribosome.
(b) Plastid in plants and Mitochondria in animals.
(c) Rough endoplasmic reticulum.
(d) Genes.

Solution SAQ – 14:

(a) Chloroplasts:
1. They are green plastids.
2. They contain chlorophylls and carotenoids.
3. Lamellae are present.
4. Chloroplasts are sites of photosynthesis.

Chromoplasts
1. They are non-green coloured plastids.
2. Chlorophylls are absent. Only carotenoids are present.
3. Lamellae are absent.
4. They add colour to the organs for attracting animals to perform pollination and fruit
dispersal.



(b)Ribosome:
1. It is found in both animal cell and plant cell.
2. These are dense, spherical and granular particles which occur freely in the matrix or remain
attached to the endoplasmic reticulum.

Centrosome:
1. Centrosome is found only in animal cells.
2. It consists of two granules like centrioles.

Solution SAQ – 15:

Animal Cell:
1. Animal cells are generally small in size.
2. Cell wall is absent.
3. Animal cells have a single highly complex and prominent Golgi apparatus.
4. Animals cells have centrosome and centrioles.
Plant Cell:
1. Plant cells are larger than animal cells.
2. The plasma membrane of plant cell is surrounded by a rigid cell wall made up of cellulose.
3. Plant cells have many simpler units of Golgi apparatus, called dictyosomes.
4. Plant cells lack centrosome and centrioles.

Solution SAQ – 16:
If nucleus is removed from a cell, the protoplasm will ultimately dry up and the cell will die
because the nucleus controls all the metabolic activities of a cell.

PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page No – 117.

Solution SAQ – 17:
Spinach looks green due to the presence of chloroplasts, papaya is yellow and edible part of
watermelon is red due to the presence chromoplasts.

Solution SAQ – 18:

(a) Functions of endoplasmic reticulum:
(i) It forms supporting skeletal framework of the cell.
(ii) ER provides a pathway for the distribution of nuclear material from one cell to the other.

(b) Functions of lysosomes:
(i) Lysosomes serve as intracellular digestive system. They destroy any foreign material which



enters the cells such as bacteria and virus.
(ii) Lysosomes also remove the worn out and poorly working cellular organelles by digesting
them to make way for their new replacements.

Solution SAQ – 19:
(a) Ribosome.
(b) Leucoplasts.

Solution SAQ – 20:
Lysosomes contain digestive enzymes for almost all types of organic materials. If their covering
membrane breaks as it happens during injury to cell, the digestive enzymes will spill over the
cell contents and digest the same. As Lysosomes are organelles which on bursting can kill cells
possessing them, they are called suicide bags.

Solution SAQ – 21:
(a) Cell Inclusions – Cell inclusions are non-living materials present in the cytoplasm.
(b) Cytosol – It is the soluble part of cytoplasm and is located between cell organelles.
(c) Protoplasm – Nucleus and cytoplasm together are called protoplasm.
(d) Nucleoplasm – It is the liquid ground substance present in the nucleus.

Solution SAQ – 22:
Ribosomes get synthesized in the nucleolus.

Solution SAQ – 23:

(a) The mitochondria are tiny bodies of varying shapes and size. Each mitochondria is bounded
by a double membrane envelope. Outer membrane is porous. The inner membrane is thrown
into folds. These folds are called cristae and are studded with small rounded bodies known as
F1 particles or oxysomes. The interior cavity of the mitochondria is filled with a proteinaceous
matrix which contains a few small-sized ribosomes, a circular DNA molecule and phosphate
granules. Mitochondria are sites of cellular respiration.

(b) Plastids occur in most plant cells and are absent in animal cells. They have their own
genome and ribosomes. There are three types of plastids: chromoplasts, chloroplasts and
leucoplasts.

Solution SAQ – 24:
The cell organelles are – Endoplasmic Reticulum, Ribosomes, Golgi apparatus, Lysosomes,
Mitochondria, Plastids, Vacuoles, Peroxisomes and Centrosome.

Solution SAQ – 25:



The three main functional regions of the cell are: Plasma membrane, Nucleus and the
cytoplasm.

Solution SAQ – 26:
(a) Nucleus.
(b) Nucleus.
(c) Vacuoles.
(d) Nucleus.

Solution SAQ – 27:
Genes are the functional units of chromosomes which transmit the heredity information from
parents to offsprings. These are located on chromosomes.

Solution SAQ – 28:
Lysosomes are called digestive bags because they digest any foreign material which enters the
cell such as bacteria and virus.

Solution SAQ – 29:
Mitochondria is called the power plant of eukaryotic cell because it contains enzymes that are
needed for the step wise oxidation of food stuffs present in the cells to carbon dioxide and
water and energy is released.

Solution SAQ – 30:

Centrioles – Centrioles are hollow and cylindrical structures which are made up of
microtubules.
Functions: (i) It migrates to the poles of animal cells and is involved in the formation of the
spindle.
(ii) In plant cells, cell division involves polar caps for the spindle formation.

Solution SAQ – 31:
Lipids gets synthesised in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and proteins gets synthesised in
the ribosomes and rough endoplasmic reticulum.

Solution SAQ – 32:



Solution SAQ – 33:

Plasmolysed cell means the cell in which the water crosses the plasma membrane in both
directions but more water leaves the cell than enters it and the cell will shrinks.

Solution LAQ – 1:

According to fluid mosaic model, plasma membrane is made up of a bilayer of phospholipids.
There are two types of protein molecules: Intrinsic Proteins, which completely covers the lipid
bilayer and Extrinsic Proteins, which occur either on the outer surface or on the inner surface of
the lipid membrane.
The fluid mosaic membrane has been described as “a number of protein icebergs floating in the
sea of lipids”.



Solution LAQ – 2:



Functions of cell organelles:

(i) Endoplasmic Reticulum – It forms the supporting skeletal framework of the cell.
(ii) Ribosomes – It synthesises proteins.
(iii) Golgi Apparatus – It produces vacuoles which contain cellular secretion.
(iv) Lysosomes – It serves as intracellular digestive system as it digest the foreign materials
which enter the cell.
(v) Mitochondria – These are the sites of cellular respirations
(vi) Plastids – These are present only in plants and trap solar energy to manufacture food for
plants.
(vii) Vacuoles – They help to maintain the osmotic pressure in a cell.
(viii) Peroxisomes – They carry out some oxidative reactions.
(ix) Centrosome – It helps in cell division in the animal cell.

Solution LAQ – 3:
Nucleus – The nucleus is a large, centrally located spherical cellular component. It is bounded
by two nuclear membranes, both forming a nuclear envelope. The nuclear envelope separates
the nucleus from the cytoplasm. Within nucleoplasm two types of nuclear structures are
embedded – the nucleolus and chromatin material. The nucleolus may be one or more in
number and is not bounded by any membrane. It is rich in protein and RNA molecules and acts
as the site for ribosome formation.



Solution LAQ – 4:

(a) Golgi apparatus consists of a set of membrane-bounded, fluid filled vesicles, vacuoles and
flattened cisternae. Cisternae are usually stacked together (placed one above the other) in
parallel rows. Golgi apparatus exists as an extensive network near the nucleus in the animal
cells. However, the plant cells contain many freely distributed subunits of Golgi apparatus,
called dictyosomes.
The Golgi apparatus arises from the membrane of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, which in
turn originates from the rough endoplasmic reticulum.



(b) The mitochondria are tiny bodies of varying shapes and size. Each mitochondria is bounded
by a double membrane envelope. Outer membrane is porous. The inner membrane is thrown
into folds. These folds are called cristae and are studded with small rounded bodies known as
F1 particles or oxysomes. The interior cavity of the mitochondria is filled with a proteinaceous
matrix which contains a few small-sized ribosomes, a circular DNA molecule and phosphate



granules. Mitochondria are sites of cellular respiration.



 Atoms andMolecules

Solution 01
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
Solution 02
(a) Law of conservation of mass – Antonie Lavoisier
(b) Law of constant proportions – Joseph Proust
Solution 03
(a) Law of conservation of mass.
(b) Law of constant proportions.

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book PAGE No 129
Solution 04
John Dalton
Solution 05
Atoms can neither be created nor destroyed.
Solution 06
The elements consist of atoms having fixed mass, and that the number and kind of atoms of
each element in a given compound is fixed.
Solution 07
Kanad ; ‘parmanu’.
Solution 08
Law of Conservation of mass and law of constant proportions.



Solution 09
Law of constant proportions.
Solution 10
Law of Conservation of mass.
Solution 11
Atoms are the building blocks of matter.
Solution 12
The size of an atom indicated by its radius which is called ‘atomic radius’.
Solution 13
The radius of an atom is usually expressed in ‘nanometers’.
Solution 14
1 nanometer = 10-9 m
Solution 15
‘nm’ represents nanometer.
Solution 16
Because they are very very small.
Solution 17
False ; it is Co
Solution 18
The molecular mass of a substance is the relative mass of its molecule as compared with the
mass of a Carbon-12 atom taken as 12 units.
Solution 19
This means that a molecule of oxygen is 32 times heavier than 1/12 of a Carbon-12 atom.
Solution 20
(a) 1:8
(b) Conservation of mass
Solution 21
(a) Carbon is used as a standard for atomic mass scale.
(b) Atom with 6 neutrons and 6 protons in its nucleus so that its mass number is 12.
(c) Mass = 12 u
Solution 22
The major drawback of Dalton’s atomic theory is that atoms were thought to be indivisible.
But, it is not true since atoms are divisible.
Solution 23
No, the statement is not valid because atoms can be divided into subatomic particles called
electrons, protons and neutrons.
Solution 24
Yes, ‘THE SCANNING TUNNELLING MICROSCOPE’ enables people to see atoms. This
microscope can produce computer generated images of the surface of elements which show
the individual atoms. The atoms show up as blurred images.
Solution 25
The symbol of element is the “first letter” or “first letter and another letter” of the English name
or Latin name of the element.
For example, symbol of Hydrogen is “H” and symbol of Calcium is “Ca”.
Solution 26
(a)Ca, Mg
(b)Cu, Hg
Solution 27
Hydrogen- H, Helium-He, Lithium-Li , Beryllium-Be, Boron-B
Solution 28
Sodium – Na
Potassium – K



Iron – Fe
Copper – Cu
Mercury – Hg
Silver – Ag
Solution 29
Hg – Mercury
Pb – Lead
Au – Gold
Ag – Silver
Sn – Tin
Solution 30
The number of atoms present in one molecule of an element is called atomicity of that
element.
For example, atomicity of sodium is 1 and that of nitrogen is 2.
Solution 31
(a) Oxygen = 2
(b) Ozone = 3
(c) Neon = 1
(d) Sulphur = 8
(e) Phosphorus = 4
(f) Sodium = 1
Solution 32
A chemical formula represents the composition of a molecule of the substance in terms of the
symbols of the elements present in the molecule. It is also known as molecular formula.
Chemical formula of element – H2 for hydrogen
Chemical formula of compound – H2O for water
Solution 33
(a). Water- H2O; Elements present are Hydrogen and Oxygen.
(b).Ammonia- NH3; Elements present are Nitrogen and Hydrogen.
(c).Methane-CH4; Elements present are Carbon and Hydrogen.
(d).Sulphur dioxide-SO2; Elements present are Sulphur and Oxygen.
(e).Ethanol-C2H5OH; Elements present are carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
Solution 34
2N represents two separate atoms of nitrogen and N2 represents one molecule of nitrogen.

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book PAGE No: 130
Solution 35
(a) O- one atom of oxygen
(b) 2O- two separate atoms of oxygen
(c) O2-one molecule of oxygen
(d)3O2-three molecules of oxygen
Solution 36
H2 represents two atoms of hydrogen, one atom of sulphur and four atoms of oxygen.
Solution 37
(a) Oxygen gas occurs as a diatomic molecule in nature.
(b) Noble gases occur as monoatomic gases in nature.
Solution 38
2H represents two separate atoms of hydrogen and H2 represents one molecule of hydrogen.
Solution 39
(a) N – one atom of nitrogen
(b) 2N – two separate atoms of nitrogen
(c) N2 – one molecule of nitrogen



(d) 2N2 – two molecules of nitrogen
Solution 40
Significance of formula of a substance-
1. Formula represents the name of the substance.
2. Formula represents one molecule of a substance.
3. Formula gives the number of atoms of each element present in one molecule.
4. Formula also represents one mole of molecules of the substance.
Solution 41
Significance of the formula H2O-
1. H2O represents water.
2. It represents one molecule of water.
3. H2O also represents 6.022 x 1023 molecules of water.
4. It represents 18gm of water.
Solution 42
Molecular formula of glucose = C6H12O6
Molecular mass of glucose = (6xC)+(12xH)+(6xO) =72 + 12 + 96 = 180u.
Solution 43
(a).Molecular mass of Hydrogen (H2) = 2 x H = 2 x 1 u = 2 u
(b).Molecular mass of oxygen (O2) = 2 x O = 2 x 16 u = 32 u
(c).Molecular mass of chlorine (Cl2) = 2 x Cl = 2 x 35.5 = 71 u
(d).Molecular mass of Ammonia (NH3) = 1 x N + 3 x H = 14 + 3 = 17 u
(e).Molecular mass of carbon dioxide (CO2) = 1 x C + 2 x O = 12 + 32 = 44 u
Solution 44
(a). Molecular mass of methane (CH4) = 12 + 4 = 16 u
(b). Molecular mass of ethane (C2H6) = 2 x 12 + 6 x 1 = 30 u
(c). Molecular mass of ethane (C2H4) = 2 x 12 + 4 x 1 = 28 u
(d). Molecular mass of ethyne (C2H2) = 2 x 12 + 2 x 1 = 26 u
Solution 45
(a) Molecular mass of Methanol(CH3OH) =
1xC + 3xH + 1xO +1xH = (12+3+16+1)u = 32u
(b) Molecular mass of Ethanol (C2H5OH) = 2xC + 5xH + 1xO +1xH
= (24 + 5 + 16 + 1) = 46u
Solution 46
Molecular mass of ethanoic acid (CH3COOH)
= 1xC + 3xH + 1xC + 2xO +1xH = 12+3+12+32+1 = 60u
Solution 47
Molecular mass of Nitric acid (HNO3) = 1xH + 1xN + 3xO
= (1 + 14 +48) u = 63 u
Solution 48
Molecular mass of chloroform (CHCl3) = 1 x C + 1 x H + 3 x Cl
= (12 + 1 + 106.5)u = 119.5 u
Solution 49
Molecular mass of hydrogen bromide (HBr) = 1 x H + 1 x Br
= (1 + 80) u = 81u
Solution 50
(a).Molecular mass of hydrogen sulphide (H2S) = 2xH + 1xS
= (2+32) u = 34u
(b). Molecular mass of Carbon disulphide (CS2) = 1xC + 2xS = (12+2 x 32) u = 76 u
Solution 51
Law of conservation of mass by LAVOISIER states that: “Mass can neither be created nor be
destroyed in a chemical reaction”. So, in a chemical reaction, the total mass of reactants must
be equal to the total mass of products.



For example: When calcium carbonate is heated, a chemical reaction takes place to form
calcium oxide and calcium carbonate. If 100 gms of calcium carbonate is decomposed
completely, then 56 gms of calcium oxide and 44 gms of carbon dioxide are formed.
In the above example: the total mass of products = 56 gms (CaO) + 44gms (CO2) = 100 gms.
As total mass of products is equal to the total mass of reactant so, the law of conservation of
mass is satisfied.
Solution 52
Law of constant proportion given by PROUST states that “A chemical compound always
consists of the same elements combined together in the same proportion by mass.”
For example: If we decompose 100 gms of pure water by passing electricity through it, then 11
gms of hydrogen and 89 gms of oxygen are obtained. Now, if we repeat this experiment by
taking pure water from different sources (like river, sea, well, etc.), the same masses of
hydrogen and oxygen elements are obtained in each case. They are always combined together
in the same constant proportion of 11:89 or 1:8 by mass. And this is the law of constant
proportions.
Solution 53
[a]. Postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory:
a) All the matter is made up of very small particles called ‘atoms’.
b) Atoms cannot be divided.
c) Atoms can neither be created nor be destroyed.
d) Atoms are of various kinds. There are as many kinds of atoms as are elements.
e) All the atoms of a given element are identical in every respect, having the same mass, size
and chemical properties.
f) Atoms of different elements differ in mass, size and chemical properties.
g) The ‘number’ and ‘kind’ of atoms in a given compound is fixed.
h) During chemical combination, atoms of different elements combine in small whole
numbers to form compounds.
i) Atoms of the same elements can combine in more than one ratio to form more than one
compound.
[b]. The postulate “The elements consists of atoms and that atoms can neither be created nor
destroyed” can be used to explain the law of conservation of mass.
[c]. The postulate “The elements consist of atoms having fixed mass, and that the number and
kind of atoms of each element in a given compound is fixed” can be used to explain the law of
constant proportions.
Solution 54
(a).Significance of symbol of element –
i. It represents name of the element.
ii. It represents one atom of the element.
iii. It represents a definite mass of the element.
iv. It represents one mole of atoms of the element.
For example – C represents one atom of the element Carbon. It also represents 12 gms of
Carbon.
(b). Significance of symbol H –
i. It represents Hydrogen element.
ii. It represents one atom of Hydrogen element.
iii. It represents one mole of Hydrogen atoms.
iv. It represents 2 gms of Hydrogen.
Solution 55
a) An atom is the smallest particle of an element that can take part in a chemical reaction.
They usually exist in combination with the atoms of same element or another element.
b) A molecule is an electrically neutral group of two or more atoms chemically bonded
together.



For example- Ozone gas has three oxygen atoms combined together, so ozone exists in the
form of O3 molecule.
c) The molecule of an element contains two or more similar atoms chemically bonded
together.
For example- A molecule of hydrogen element consists of 2 hydrogen atoms combined
together.
Whereas the molecule of compound contains two or more different type of atoms chemically
bonded together.
For example- The molecule of hydrogen chloride(HCl) contains two different type of atoms, i.e.
H and Cl.
Solution 56
(a) One atomic mass unit is defined as exactly one-twelfth the mass of an atom of carbon-12.
Its symbol is ‘u’.
(b) The atomic mass of an element is the relative mass of its atom as compared with the
mass of a carbon-12 atom taken as 12 units.
(c) It means that one atom of oxygen is 16 times heavier than 1/12 of a C-12 atom.

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book PAGE NO 131
Solution 75
According to question-

Clearly, in this case
total mass of reactants = (15.95 gm + 8 gm) = 23.95 gm
total mass of products = (9.75 gm + 14.2 gm) = 23.95 gm
Hence, Law of conservation of mass is valid here.
Solution 76
According to question-

Let, x gm of oxygen is formed
Then, according to law of conservation of mass-
24.5 gm = 14.9 gm + x gm
So, x = (24.5 � 14.9) gm = 9.6 gm.
Thus, 9.6 gm of oxygen is formed in the reaction
Solution 77
According to question-
Reaction 1-

Here again, one can see that 1.25 equivalent of CuO decomposed to form 1 equivalent of Cu



and 0.25 equivalent of oxygen.
Hence, law of constant proportion is verified.
Solution 78
According to question-

i.e. three equivalents of Mg reacts with 2 equivalents of O2 to form 1 equivalent of MgO.
When mass of Mg = 3x = 24 gm
So, x = 8 gm
Then, mass of oxygen required = 2x = 16 gm

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book PAGE NO: 132
Solution 79
When 5 gm of calcium is burnt in 2 gm of oxygen, then 7 gm of calcium oxide is formed. So,
calcium and oxygen combine in the fixed proportion of 5:2 by mass.
Now, when 5 gm of calcium is burnt in 20 gm of oxygen, then also 7gm of calcium oxide will
be formed because chemical reactions follows law of constant proportion.
As a result, 18 gm of oxygen will be left unreacted.
Solution 80
According to question-

(a) Liquid X – Water
Gas Y – Oxygen
Gas Z – Hydrogen
(b) mass of Z / mass of Y = 22gm / 178 gm = 1:8
(c) Law of constant proportion is illustrated by this example.
(d) Two sources of liquid X – Sea, Well
(e) Gas Y (oxygen) is necessary for breathing.
Solution 81
According to question-

(a) Solid P – Calcium Carbonate (CaCO3)
Gas Q – Carbon dioxide (CO2)
Solid R – Calcium oxide (CaO)
(b) Total mass of Q and R = 22gm + 28gm = 50gm
(c) Total mass of Q and R (50gm) is equal to mass of reactant (50gm).
(d) The law of conservation of mass is followed, i.e. total mass of product is equal to mass of
reactant.
(e) Law of conservation of mass is illustrated by the example.

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book PAGE No 150
Solution 01
Ions
Solution 02
(a). Anions ; (b). Cations
Solution 03
The formula mass of an ionic compound is the relative mass of its ‘formula unit’ as compared
with the mass of a Carbon-12 atom taken as 12 units.



Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book PAGE NO 151
Solution 04
(a) Anions are formed by the gain of electrons by atoms
(b) Cations are formed by the loss of electrons by atoms
Solution 05
(a) False
(b) True
Solution 06
(a). Calcium oxide – CaO
(b). Magnesium hydroxide – Mg(OH)2
Solution 07
Valency of element Z = 3
Valency of oxygen = 2
So, formula of oxide of element = Z2O3
Solution 08
Its Na+ , the sodium ion.
Solution 09
Its Cl-, the chloride ion.
Solution 10
(a) Anion
(b) Cation
(c) Ion
(d) Electrons ; protons
(e) Protons ; electrons
Solution 11
Water is made up of Hydrogen and oxygen.
Valency of hydrogen is +1 ; Valency of oxygen is -2.
Chemical formula of water is H2O.
Solution 12

So, chemical formula of ammonia is NH3.
Solution 13

Chemical formula of sulphur dioxide is SO2.
Solution 14
According to question-

Name and formula of the resulting compound is Carbon disulphide; CS2.
Solution 15
As the valency of element X is 4 and that of Y is 1, so the resulting formula is XY4.
Solution 16



Solution 17

Solution 18

Solution 19
(a). Bromide of element-
As valency of bromine is -1 and that of element X is +2 so, the resulting compound is XBr2.
(b). Oxide of element-
As valency of oxygen is -2 and that of element is +2 so, the resulting compound is XO.
Solution 20

Solution 21
(a).Molecular mass of Na2O = (2 x Na) + (1 x O) = (2 x 23) + (1 x 16) = 62u
(b). Molecular Mass of Al2O3 = (2 x Al) + (3 x O) = (2 x 27) + (3 x 16) = 102u
Solution 22
(a). CuSO4 : Copper sulphate; Cu+2 and SO4-2
(b). (NH4)2SO4 : Ammonium sulphate; NH4+ and SO4-2.
(c). Na2O : Sodium oxide; Na+ and O-2
(d). Na2CO�3 : Sodium carbonate; Na+ and CO4-2.
(e). CaCl2 : Calcium chloride; Ca+2 and Cl-.
Solution 23
(a). CH3COONa : Na+ (cation) and CH3COO- (anion)
(b). NaCl : Na+ (cation) and Cl- (anion)
(c). H2 : It is a covalent molecule. So, cation and anion are not present.
(d). NH4NO3 : NH4+ (cation) and NO3- (anion)
Solution 24



Solution 25
i. Ionic compounds- The compounds which are formed by combination of metals and non-
metals are called ionic compounds. For ex: CaCl2 and CaCO3.
ii. Molecular compounds- These compounds are formed by the combination between two non-
metal elements. For ex. HCl and H2S.

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book PAGE No 152
Solution 26

Solution 27
(a)A cation is formed by the loss of one or more electrons by an atom. For ex. Magnesium
loses 2 electron to form Mg+2.
An anion is formed by the gain of one or more electrons by an atom. For Ex. Chlorine loses
one electron to form Cl-.
(b) (i). Na2S
(ii). Cu (NO3)2
Solution 28

Solution 29



(a). Simple ions: Br- and Na+ ; Compound ions: NH4+ and Al+3
(b). (i). YCl4 (ii). YO2 (iii). Y (SO4)2 (iv). Y (CO3)2 (v). Y (NO3)4
Solution 30
(a). The simplest combination of ions that produces an electrically neutral unit, is called
‘formula unit’ of the ionic compound.
Formula unit of sodium chloride – NaCl
Formula unit of magnesium chloride – MgCl2
(b).
(i). Formula Mass of Calcium chloride (CaCl2) = 1xCa + 2xCl = (40+71) u = 111 u
(ii). Formula Mass of Sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) = 2xNa + 1xC + 3xO= (2×23 + 1×12 + 3×16)
u = 106 u

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book PAGE NO 153
Solution 46
(a). Let the valency of element A be y, then
2y + 5(-2) = 0
So, y = valency of element A = 5
(b). As valency of element A is 5 and valency of chlorine is -1,
So, the formula of chloride of A is ACl5.
Solution 47
Valency of X –
(i). In H2X : -2
(ii).In CX2 : -2
(iii).In XO2 : +4
(iv).In XO3 : +6
Solution 48
Let the valency of X be y, then
2 x (+3) + 3 x y = 0
So, valency of X = y = -2
As valency of Mg is +2 and that of X is -2 so the formula of Magnesium salt of X will be MgX.
Solution 49
According to formula M2CO3, valency of M is +1.
(a). formula of iodide = MI (as valency of iodine is -1)
(b). formula of nitride = M3N (as valency of nitrogen is -3)
(c). formula of phosphate = M3PO4
Solution 50
(a). Anion will be formed by element X ; Symbol : X-
(b). (i). No. of protons in X = 17
(ii). No. of electrons in X = 18
(iii). No. of neutrons in X = 18
(c). Cation will be formed by element Y ; Symbol : Y+
(d). (i). No. of protons in Y = 11
(ii). No. of electrons in Y = 10
(iii). No. of neutrons in Y = 12
(e).Atomic mass of X = No. of protons(17) + No. of neutrons(18) = 35 u
Atomic mass of Y = No. of protons (11) + No. of neutrons (12) = 23 u
(f). Element X is Chlorine (Cl).
Element Y is Sodium (Na).

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book PAGE NO: 172
Solution 1
A mole



Solution 2
1 mole
Solution 3

Solution 4

Solution 5

Solution 6
Avogadro number
Solution 7
Given mass of oxygen = 12g
Molar mass of oxygen = 32g
No. of moles = Given mass / Molar mass = 12g /32g = 0.375
Solution 8
No. of moles = 3.6g / 18g = 0.2 mole
Solution 9
Mass of 0.2 moles of oxygen atoms = 0.2 x 16 = 3.2g
Solution 10
Mass of 2 moles of nitrogen atoms = 2 x 14 = 28g
Solution 11
Given mass of CaCO3 = 10g
Molar mass of CaCO3 = 1xCa + 1xC + 3xO = (40+12+48)gm = 100gm
So, no. of moles of CaCO3 = Given mass/Molar mass = 10/100 = 0.1 moles
Solution 12

Solution 13

Solution 14

Solution 15

Solution 16



Solution 17

Solution 18

Solution 19

Solution 20

Solution 21

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 Chemistry Text Book Page No 173
Solution 22

Solution 23

Solution 24



Solution 25

Solution 26

Solution 27

Solution 28

Solution 29

Solution 30

Solution 31

Solution 32



Solution 33

Solution 34

Solution 35

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 Chemistry Text Book Page No 174
Solution 43

Solution 44



Solution 45

Solution 46

Solution 47

Solution 48

Solution 49



Solution 50



Gravitation

Question 1:
What is the value of gravitational constant G (i) on the earth, and (ii) on the moon ?
Solution :
Value of gravitational constant G on the earth and the moon is = 6.67 x 10-11 Nm2/kg2

Note that the value of G always remains constant irrespective of the location.

Question 2:
Which force is responsible for the moon revolving round the earth ?
Solution :
Gravitational force is responsible for the moon revolving round the earth.

Question 3:
Does the acceleration produced in a freely falling body depend on the mass of the body ?
Solution :
No, the acceleration produced in a freely falling body is independent of the mass of the body.

Question 4:
Name the scientist who gave the three laws of planetary motion.
Solution :
Johannes Kepler gave the three laws of planetary motion.

Question 5:
Name the scientist who explained the motion of planets on the basis of gravitational force
between the sun and planets.
Solution :
Newton explained the motion of planets on the basis of gravitational force between the sun
and planets.

Question 6:
State the Kepler’s law which is represented by the relation r3 ∝ T2.



Solution :
Kepler’s law of periods states that: The cube of the mean distance of a planet from the sun is
directly proportional to the square of time it takes to move around the sun.

Question 7:
Which of the Kepler’s laws of planetary motion led Newton to establish the inverse-square rule
for gravitational force between two bodies ?
Solution :
Kepler’s third law of planetary motion led Newton to establish the inverse-square rule for
gravitational force between two bodies.

Question 8:
Name the property of earth which is responsible for extremely small acceleration being
produced in it as a result of attraction by other small objects.
Solution :
Extremely large mass of the earth.

Question 9:
What is the acceleration produced in a freely falling body of mass 10 kg ? (Neglect air
resistance)
Solution :
Acceleration produced in a freely falling body, irrespective of its mass, is 9.8m/s2

Question 10:
When an object is dropped from a height, it accelerates and falls down. Name the force which
accelerates the object.
Solution :
Gravitational force of the earth.

Question 11:
Give the formula for the gravitational force F between two bodies of masses M and m kept at
a distance d from each other.
Solution :
The gravitational force F between two bodies of masses M and m kept at a distance d from
each other is :

Question 12:
What force is responsible for the earth revolving round the sun ?
Solution :
Gravitational force is responsible for the earth revolving round the sun.

Question 13:
What name has been given to the force with which two objects lying apart attract each other ?
Solution :
Gravitational force causes two objects lying apart attract each other.

Question 14:
What type of force is involved in the formation of tides in the sea ?
Solution :



Gravitational force (exerted mainly by the moon and to some extent by the sun) is involved in
the formation of tides in the sea.

Question 15:
Which force is responsible for holding the solar system together ?
Solution :
Gravitational force of the sun holds the solar system together.

Question 16:
What is the weight of a 1 kilogram mass on the earth ? (g = 9.8 m/s2).
Solution :
Weight, W = m x g
= 1 kg x 9.8m/s2=9.8 N

Question 17:
On what factor/factors does the weight of a body depend ?
Solution :
The weight of a body is directly proportional to its mass. It also depends on the acceleration
due to gravity which varies from place to place.

Question 18:
As the altitude of a body increases, do the weight and mass both vary ?
Solution :
Weight of the body varies with altitude; mass of an object is constant.

Question 19:
If the same body is taken to places having different gravitational field strength, then what will
vary: its weight or mass ?
Solution :
Its weight varies; mass of an object is constant.

Question 20:
If the mass of an object be 10 kg, what is its weight ? (g = 9.8 m/s2).
Solution :
Weight, W = m x g = 10 x 9.8 =98 N

Question 21:
The weight of a body is 50 N. What is its mass ? (g = 9.8 m/s2).
Solution :
Weight, W = m x g

Question 22:
A body has a weight of 10 kg on the surface of earth. What will be its weight when taken to the
centre of the earth ?
Solution :
Its weight will be zero as value of g is zero at the centre of the earth.

Question 23:
Write down the weight of a 50 kg mass on the earth, (g = 9.8 m/s2).
Solution :
Weight, W= m x g =50 x 9.8=490N



Question 24:
If the weight of a body on the earth is 6 N, what will it be on the moon ?
Solution :
Weight of the body on the surface of moon will be 1N approx. as the value of g on the surface
of moon is one-sixth that of the earth

Question 25:
State whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) A falling stone also attracts the earth.
(b) The force of gravitation between two objects depends on the nature of medium between
them.

(c) The value of G on the moon is about one-sixth  of the value of G on the earth.
(d) The acceleration due to gravity acting on a freely falling body is directly proportional to the
mass of the body.
(e) Tire weight of an object on the earth is about one-sixth of its weight on the moon.
Solution :
(a)True
(b)False
(c)False
(d)False
(e) False

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:101

Question 26:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The acceleration due to gravity on the moon is about………………………. of that on the earth.
(b) In order that the force of gravitation between two bodies may become noticeable and
cause motion, one  of the bodies must have an extremely large……………………………..
(c) The weight of an object on the earth is about……………….. of its weight on the moon.
(d) The weight of an object on the moon is about …………………….. of its weight on the earth.
(e) The value of g on the earth is about………………. of that on the moon.
(f) If the weight of a body is 6 N on the moon, it will be about……………………… on the earth.
Solution :
(a) One-sixth
(b) Mass
(c) Six times
(d) One-sixth
(e) Six times
(f) 36N

Question 27:
Explain what is meant by the equation :

where the symbols have their usual meanings.
Solution :
This is the acceleration produced by the earth. It is also called acceleration due to gravity.



where, G= gravitational constant 

M= mass of the earth. 

R=radius of the earth

Question 28:
(a) What do you mean by the term ‘free fall’ ?
(b) During a free fall, will heavier objects accelerate more than lighter ones ?
Solution :
(a) The falling of a body from a height towards the earth under the gravitational force of the
earth (with no other forces acting on it) is called free fall.
(b) No, acceleration is independent of the mass of the body during free fall.

Question 29:
Can we apply Newton’s third law to the gravitational force ? Explain your answer.
Solution :
Yes, Newton’s third law of motion holds good for the force of gravitation. This means that
when earth exerts a force of attraction on an object, then the object also exerts an equal force
on the earth, in the opposite direction.

Question 30:
Give reason for the following :
The force of gravitation between two cricket balls is extremely small but that between a
cricket ball and the earth is extremely large.
Solution :
The force of gravitation between two bodies is directly proportional to the product of their
masses.

Since the mass of cricket balls is very small as compared to that of the earth, so the force of
gravitation between two cricket balls is extremely small while that between a ball and the earth
is extremely large.

Question 31:
Describe how the gravitational force between two objects depends on the distance between
them.
Solution :
The gravitational force F between two bodies of masses M and m kept at a distance d from
each other is :

Therefore , if we double the distance between two bodies, the gravitational force becomes
one-fourth and if we halve the distance between two bodies, then the gravitational force
becomes four times .



Question 32:
What happens to the gravitational force between two objects when the distance between
them is :
(i) doubled ?
(ii) halved ?
Solution :
(a)If we double the distance between two bodies, the gravitational force becomes one-fourth.
(b)If we halve the distance between two bodies, then the gravitational force becomes four
times.

Question 33:
State two applications of universal law of gravitation.
Solution :
(i) Universal law of gravitation is used to determine the masses of the sun, the earth and the
moon accurately.
(ii) Universal law of gravitation helps in discovering new stars and planets.

Question 34:
Explain why, if a stone held in our hand is released, it falls towards the earth.
Solution :
This is because the earth exerts a force of attraction (called gravity) on the stone and pulls it
down.

Question 35:
Calculate the force of gravitation between two objects of masses 50 kg and 120 kg
respectively kept at a distance of 10 m from one another. (Gravitational constant, G = 6.7 x 10-

11 Nm2 kg-2)
Solution :

Question 36:
What is the force of gravity on a body of mass 150 kg lying on the surface of the earth? (Mass
of earth = 6 x 1024 kg; Radius of earth = 6.4 x 10 6 m; G = 6.7 x 10 -11 Nm2/kg2)
Solution :

Question 37:
The mass of sun is 2 x 10 30 kg and the mass of earth is 6 x 10 24 If the average distance
between the sun and the earth be 1.5 x 108 km, calculate the force of gravitation between
them.
Solution :
Distance d=1.5 x 108km= 1.5 x 1011 m

30



Mass of the sun, m=2×1030kg
Mass of the earth,

Question 38:
A piece of stone is thrown vertically upwards. It reaches the maximum height in 3 seconds. If
the acceleration of the stone be 9.8 m/s2 directed towards the ground, calculate the initial
velocity of the stone with which it is thrown upwards
Solution :
Initial velocity of the stone, u=?
Final velocity of
stone, v=0
Acceleration due to gravity, g= -9.8m/s2

Time, t=3 sec
Using relation, v=u + gt
0 = u -9.8 x 3
u =29.4m/s

Question 39:
A stone falls from a building and reaches the ground 2.5 seconds later. How high is the
building ? (g =8 m/s2)
Solution :
Initial velocity,
u=0m/s
Acceleration due to
gravity, g=9.8m/s2

Time taken to reach
the ground, t=2.5 sec
Height, h=?
Using relation,

Question 40:
A stone is dropped from a height of 20 m.
(i) How long will it take to reach the ground ?
(ii) What will be its speed when it hits the ground ? (g =10 m/s2)



Solution :
Height, s=20m
Initial velocity, u=0
Acceleration due to gravity, g=10m/s2

Final velocity, v=?
Time taken, t=?
(i) Using relation,
(ii) For a freely falling body:
v2 = u2 + 2gh

Question 41:
A stone is thrown vertically upwards with a speed of 20 m/s. How high will it go before it
begins to fall ? (g =8 m/s2)
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=20m/s
Final velocity, v=0
Acceleration due to gravity, g=-9.8m/s2

Height, h=?
Using relation, for a freely falling body:
v2 = u2 + 2gh
(0)2 = (20)2 + 2 x (-9.8) x h
0-400 = -19.6 h
h= 400/19.6 = 20.4 m

Question 42:
When a cricket ball is thrown vertically upwards, it reaches a maximum height of 5 metres.
(a) What was the initial speed of the ball ?
(b) How much time is taken by the ball to reach the highest point ? (g=10 ms-2)
Solution :
Initial velocity, u=?
Final velocity, v=0
Acceleration due to gravity, g=-10m/s2

Height, h=5 m
(a) For a freely falling body:
v2 = u2 + 2gh
(0)2 = u2+ 2 x(-10)x 5
0= u2 -100

2



u2= 100
So, u=10m/s
(b) Using relation, v=u + gt
0 = 10 + (-10) t
-10= -10 t
t=1sec

Question 43:
Write the differences between mass and weight of an object.
Solution :

Question 44:
Can a body have mass but no weight ? Give reasons for your answer.
Solution :
Yes, weight of a body is not constant, it varies with the value of acceleration due to gravity, g.
Weight of a body is zero, when it is taken to the centre of the earth or in the interplanetary
space, where g=0.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:102

Question 45:
A force of 20 N acts upon a body whose weight is 9.8 N. What is the mass of the body and
how much is its acceleration ? (g = 9.8 m s-2).
Solution :
Weight= 9.8N
W= m x g
9.8 =m x 9.8
m= 1kg
Force, F= mass x acceleration
20 N = 1kg x a
Acceleration,
a=20m/s2

Question 46:
A stone resting on the ground has a gravitational force of 20 N acting on it. What is the weight
of the stone ? What is its mass ? (g = 10 m/s2).
Solution :
Weight of the stone = Gravitational force acting on it = 20 N
Weight, W= m x g
20=m x 10
m=2 kg

Question 47:
An object has mass of 20 kg on earth. What will be its (i) mass, and (ii) weight, on the moon ?

2



(g on moon = 1.6 m/s2).
Solution :
(i) Its mass will be 20 kg as mass is a constant quantity.
(ii)Weight, W= m x g =20 x 1.6=32N

Question 48:
Which is more fundamental, the mass of a body or its weight ? Why ?
Solution :
The mass of a body is more fundamental because mass of a body is constant and does not
change from place to place.

Question 49:
How much is the weight of an object on the moon as compared to its weight on the earth ?
Give reason for your answer

Solution :
The weight of an object on the moon is about one-sixth of its weight on the earth. This is
because the value of acceleration due to gravity on the moon is about
one-sixth of that on the earth.

Question 50:
(a) Define mass of a body. What is the SI unit of mass ?
(b) Define weight of a body. What is the SI unit of weight ?
(c) What is the relation between mass and weight of a body ?
Solution :
(a) The mass of a body is the quantity of matter contained in it. The SI unit of mass is kilogram
(kg).
(b) The weight of a body is the force with which it is attracted towards the centre of the earth.
The SI unit of weight is newton (N).
(c) Weight, W =m x g, i.e. the weight of a body is directly proportional to its mass.

Question 51:
(a) State the universal law of gravitation. Name the scientist who gave this law.
(b) Define gravitational constant. What are the units of gravitational constant ?
Solution :
(a) According to universal law of gravitation: Every body in the universe attracts every other
body with a force (F) which is directly proportional to the product of their masses (m and M)
and inversely proportional to the square of the distance (d) between them.

Sir Isaac Newton gave this law.



Question 52:
(a) What do you understand by the term ‘acceleration due to gravity of earth’ ?
(b) What is the usual value of the acceleration due to gravity of earth ?
(c) State the SI unit of acceleration due to gravity.
Solution :
(a) The uniform acceleration produced in a freely falling body due to the gravitational force of
the earth is called acceleration due to gravity of earth.
(b) Usual value of acceleration due to gravity, g=9.8 m/s2.
(c) SI unit of acceleration due to gravity is m/s2.

Question 53:
(a) Is the acceleration due to gravity of earth ‘g’ a constant ? Discuss.
(b) Calculate the acceleration due to gravity on the surface of a satellite having a mass of 7.4 x
1022 kg and a radius of 1.74 x 106 m (G = 6.7 x 10 -11 Nm2/kg2). Which satellite do you think it
could be ?
Solution :
(a) No, the value of acceleration due to gravity (g) is not constant at all the places on the
surface of the earth. Since the radius of the earth is minimum at the poles and maximum at
the equator, the value of g is maximum at the poles and minimum at the equator. As we go up
from the surface of the earth, the distance from the centre of the earth increases and hence
the value of g decreases. The value of g also decreases as we go down inside the earth.

Question 54:
State and explain Kepler’s laws of planetary motion. Draw diagrams to illustrate these laws.
Solution :
Kepler’s first law: The planets move in elliptical orbits around the sun, with the sun at one of
the two foci of the elliptical orbit. This law means that the orbit of a planet around the sun is an
ellipse and not an exact circle. An elliptical path has two foci, and the sun is at one of the two
foci of the elliptical path.
Kepler’s Second law states that: Each planet revolves around the sun in such a way that the
line joining the planet to the sun sweeps over equal areas in equal intervals of time. This
means that a planet does not move with constant speed around the sun. The speed is greater
when the planet is nearer the sun, and less when the planet is farther away from the sun.
Kepler’s Third Law states that: The cube of the mean distance of a planet from the sun is
directly proportional to the square of time it takes to move around the sun.



Question 55:
The mass of a planet is 6 x 10 24 kg and its diameter is 12.8 x 103 If the value of gravitational
constant be 6.7 x 10-11 Nm2/kg2, calculate the value of acceleration due to gravity on the
surface of the planet. What planet could this be ?
Solution :
Acceleration due to gravity,

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:103

Question 71:
If the distance between two masses is increased by a factor of 5, by what factor would the
mass of one of them have to be altered to maintain the same gravitational force ? Would this
be an increase or decrease in the mass ?
Solution :
Gravitational force is given by:



Hence one of the masses should be increased by 25 times in order to have the same
gravitational force.

Question 72:
Universal law of gravitation states that every object exerts a gravitational force of attraction on
every other object. If this is true, why don’t we notice such forces ? Why don’t the two objects
in a room move towards each other due to this force ?

Solution :
In order to be able to notice the gravitational force of attraction between any two objects, at
least one of the objects on the earth should have an extremely large mass. Since no object on
the earth have an extremely large mass, we cannot notice such forces.
The two objects in a room do not move towards each other because due to their small
masses, the gravitational force of attraction between them is very, very weak.

Question 73:
Suppose a planet exists whose mass and radius both are half those of the earth. Calculate the
acceleration due to gravity on the surface of this planet.
Solution :
Acceleration due to gravity of earth,



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:104

Question 74:
A coin and a piece of paper are dropped simultaneously from the same height. Which of the
two will touch the ground first ? What will happen if the coin and the piece of paper are
dropped in vacuum ? Give reasons for your answer.
Solution :
The coin reaches the ground first as compared to the piece of paper because it experiences
lesser resistance from air than that felt by paper.
If the coin and the piece of paper are dropped in vacuum, both of them will touch the ground at
the same time.

Question 75:
A stone and the earth attract each other with an equal and opposite force. Why then we see
only the stone falling towards the earth but not the earth rising towards the stone ?
Solution :
The mass of a stone is very small, due to which the gravitational force produces a large
acceleration in it. Due to large acceleration of stone, we see stone falling towards the earth.
The mass of earth is, however, very, very large. Due to the very large mass of the earth, the
same gravitational force produces very, very small acceleration in the earth, that it cannot be
observed. And hence we do not see the earth rising up towards the stone.

Question 76:
What is the actual shape of the orbit of a planet around the sun ? What assumption was made
by Newton regarding the shape of an orbit of a planet around the sun for deriving his inverse
square rule from Kepler’s third law of planetary motion ?
Solution :
The actual shape of the orbit of a planet around the sun is elliptical. The assumption made by
the Newton regarding the shape of an orbit of a planet around the sun was that the orbit of a
planet around the sun is ‘circular’.

Question 77:
The values of g at six distances A, B, C, D, E and F from the surface of the earth are found to
be 3.08 m/s2, 9.2.3 m/s2, 0.57 m/s2, 7.34 m/s2, 0.30 m/s2 and 1.49 m/s2, respectively.
(a) nArrange these values of g according to the increasing distances from the surface of the
earth (keeping the value of g nearest to the surface of the earth first)
(b) If the value of distance F be 10000 km from the surface of the earth, state whether this



distance is deep . inside the earth or high up in the sky. Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
(a) 9.23 m/s2 , 7.34 m/s2 , 3.08 m/s2 , 1.49 m/s2 , 0.57 m/s2 , 0.30 m/s2

(b) This distance F of 10000 km is high up in the sky. The distance of 10000 km cannot be
deep inside the earth because the radius of earth is only about 6400km and the value of g at
the centre of earth becomes zero.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:123

Question 1:
Write the common unit of density.
Solution :
Grams per cubic centimtre (g/cm3).

Question 2:
What is the density of water in SI units ?
Solution :
Density of water =1000kg/m3.

Question 3:
What is the value of relative density of water ?
Solution :
Relative density of water is 1.

Question 4:
Name the quantity whose one of the units is pascal (Pa).
Solution :
Pressure has unit of Pascal (Pa).

Question 5:
State the units in which pressure is measured.
Solution :
Pressure is measured in newtons per square metre (N/m2) i.e., pascal (Pa).

Question 6:
State whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) The buoyant force depends on the nature of object immersed in the liquid
(b) Archimedes’ principle can also be applied to gases.
Solution :
(a) False
(b) True

Question 7:
In which direction does the buoyant force on an object due to a liquid act ?
Solution :
Buoyant force on an object due to a liquid act s in the vertically upward direction.

Question 8:
What is the other name of buoyant force ?
Solution :
Upthrust is the other name of buoyant force.



Question 9:
Name the force which makes heavy objects appear light when immersed in a liquid.
Solution :
Buoyant force.

Question 10:
What is upthrust ?
Solution :
The upward force acting on an object immersed in a liquid is called upthrust.

Question 11:
Name the principle which gives the magnitude of buoyant force acting on an object immersed
in a liquid.
Solution :
Archimedes’ Principle.

Question 12:
lire relative density of mercury is 13.6. What does this statement mean ?
Solution :
The relative density of mercury is 13.6, this means that mercury is 13.6 times as heavy as an
equal volume of water.

Question 13:
What name is given to ‘thrust per unit area’ ?
Solution :
Pressure is ‘thrust per unit area’.

Question 14:
What is the ss ientific name of the ‘upward force’ acting on an object immersed in a liquid ?
Solution :
Buoyant force or upthrust.

Question 15:
What is meant by the term ‘buoyancy’ ?
Solution :
The tendency of a liquid to exert an upward force on an object placed in it, is called buoyancy.

Question 16:
What causes buoyant force (or upthrust) on a boat ?
Solution :
The buoyant force on a boat is caused by the pressure of water ‘pushing up’ on the bottom of
the boat.

Question 17:
Why does ice float in water ?
Solution :
The density of ice is less than that of water, so ice floats in water.

Question 18:
What force acting on an area of 0.5 m2 will produce a pressure of 500 Pa ?
Solution :



Question 19:
An object of weight 200 N is floating in a liquid. What is the magnitude of buoyant force acting
on it ?
Solution :
Since the object floats in the liquid, so the magnitude of the buoyant force exerted by the liquid
is equal to the weight of the object.
Hence, buoyant force =200N

Question 20:
Name the scientist who gave he magnitude of buoyant force acting on a solid object
immersed in a liquid.
Solution :
Archimedes gave the magnitude of buoyant force acting on a solid object immersed in a liquid

Question 21:
The density of gold is 19 g/cm3. Find the volume of 95 g of gold.
Solution :

Question 22:
What is the mass of 5 m3 of cement of density 3000 kg/m3 ?
Solution :
Volume=5m3

Density= 3000kg/m3

Question 23:
What is the density of a substance of mass 100 g and volume 10 cm3 ?
Solution :
Mass of the substance = 100g
Volume of the substance =10cm3

Question 24:



Why does a block of wood held under water rise to the surface when released ?
Solution :
Because the weight of the block of wood is less than the weight of an equal volume of water.
So when it is completely submerged in water, the upward buoyant force on it is greater than
the downward gravitational force on it. Hence, the lock rises to the surface.

Question 25:
The density of a body is 800 kg/m3. Will it sink or float when dipped in a bucket of water ?
(Density’ of water = 1000 kg/m3).
Solution :
The body will float when dipped in a bucket of water as its density is less than that of water.

Question 26:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Force acting on a unit area is called…………………..
(b) It is the……………. force which makes objects appear lighter in water.
(c) A heavy ship floats in water because its……………………. density is less than that of water.
(d) In fluids (liquids and gases), pressure acts in……………………….. directions, and
pressure………………… as the depth increases.
(e) In order to sink in a fluid, the density of an object must be……………………… than the…………………
of the fluid.
(f) Snow shoes work by spreading out a person’s……………………… over a much
bigger………………………..
(g) If the area of a snow shoe is five times……………………. than the area of an ordinary shoe, then
the pressure of a snow shoe on the snow is five times……………………
Solution :
(a) pressure
(b) buoyant
(c) average
(d) all; increases
(e) less; density
(f) weight; area
(g) bigger; smaller

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:124

Question 27:
(a) What is the difference between the density and relative density of a substance ?
(b) If the relative density of a substance is 7.1, what will be its density in SI units ?
Solution :
(a) The density of a substance is defined as mass of the substance per unit volume.



Question 28:
Define thrust. What is its unit ?
Solution :
The force acting on a body perpendicular to its surface is called thrust. The SI unit of thrust is
newton (N).

Question 29:
A mug full of water appears light as long as it is under water in the bucket than when it is
outside water.
Why ?
Solution :
A mug full of water appears light as long as it is under water because buoyant force acts on it
which reduces its effective weight and makes it appear lighter.

Question 30:
What happens to the buoyant force as more and more volume of a solid object is immersed in
a liquid ? When does the buoyant force become maximum ?
Solution :
As more and more volume of the solid object is immersed in the liquid, the upward ‘buoyant
force’ also keeps on increasing. When the object is completely immersed in the liquid, the
buoyant force acting on the solid becomes maximum and remains constant thereafter.

Question 31:
Why do we feel light on our feet when standing in a swimming pool with water up to our
armpits ?
Solution :
As more and more volume of our body is immersed in water, the apparent weight of the body
goes on decreasing and the body seems to become lighter. This is due to the increase in
upward buoyant force acting on the body.

Question 32:
Explain why, big boulders can be moved easily by flood.
Solution :
Big boulders weig much less while in water and as such are easily moved by the flood.

Question 33:
An iron nail sinks in water but it floats in mercury. Why ?
Solution :



An iron nail sinks in water but it floats in mercury because density of iron is more than that of
water but less than that of mercury.

Question 34:
Explain why, a piece of glass sinks in water but it floats in mercury.
Solution :
A piece of glass sinks in water but it floats in mercury because density of glass is more than
that of water but less than that of mercury.

Question 35:
Steel sinks in water but a steel boat floats. Why ?
Solution :
A piece of steel sinks in water because steel is denser than water. However, a steel ship is a
hollow object made of steel and contains a lot of air in it. Due to presence of a lot of air in it, the
average density of the ship becomes less than the density of water. Hence a ship floats in
water.

Question 36:
Explain why, school bags are provided with wide straps to carry them.
Solution :
School bags have wide straps so that their weight may spread over a large area of shoulder
producing less pressure on the shoulder.

Question 37:
Why does a sharp knife cut objects more effectively than a blunt knife ?
Solution :
A sharp knife cuts objects easily because due to its very thin edge, the force of our hand falls
on a very small area of the object producing large pressure.

Question 38:
Explain why, wooden (or concrete) sleepers are kept below the railway line.
Solution :
Concrete or wooden
sleepers are kept below the railway line so that the weight of passing train
is spread over a large area of ground and the track may not sink into the
ground.

Question 39:
Explain why, a wide steel belt is provided over the wheels of an army tank.

Solution :
A wide steel belt is



provided over the wheels of an army tank so that they exert less pressure on
the ground and do not sink into it.

Question 40:
Explain why, the tip of a sewing needle is sharp.

Solution :
The tip of the sewing needle is sharp so that due to its sharp tip, the needle may put the force
on a very small area of the cloth, producing a large pressure sufficient to pierce the cloth being
stitched.

Question 41:
When is the pressure on the ground more—when a man is walking or when a man is standing
? Explain.
Solution :
When a man is walking, then at one time only one foot is on the ground. Due to this, the force
of weight of man falls on a smaller area of the ground and produces more pressure on the
ground. On the other hand, when the man is standing, then both his feet are on the ground.
Due to this, the weight of the man falls on a larger area of the ground and produces lesser
pressure on the ground.

Question 42:
Explain why, snow shoes stop you from sinking into soft snow.
Solution :
Snow shoes stop us from sinking into soft snow because due to large area of snow shoes, our
weight is spread over a large area of the snow producing small pressure.

Question 43:
Explain why, when a person stands on a cushion, the depression is much more than when he
lies down on it.
Solution :
When a person stands on a cushion then only his two feet (having small area) are in contact
with the cushion. Due to this the weight of man falls on a small area of the cushion producing
a large pressure causing a big depression in the cushion. On the other hand, when the same
person lies down on the cushion, then his whole body (having large area) is in contact with the
cushion. Here, his weight falls on a much larger area of the cushion producing much smaller
pressure and very little depression in the cushion.

Question 44:
Use your ideas about pressure to explain why it is easier to walk on soft sand if you have flat
shoes rather than shoes with sharp heels.
Solution :
Flat shoes have greater area in contact with the soft sand as compared to heels. Due to this,



there is less pressure on soft sand because of which they do not sink much in the sand and it
is easy to walk on it.

Question 45:
Explain why, a nail has a pointed tip.

Solution :
A nail has a pointed tip, so that when it is hammered, the force of hammer is transferred to a
very small area of wood creating a large pressure which pushes the nail into the wood.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:125

Question 46:
Explain why, buildings and dams have wide foundations.
Solution :
The foundations of buildings and dams are laid on a large area of ground so that the weight of
the building or dam produces less pressure on the ground and they may not sink into the
ground.

Question 47:
Why does a ship made of iron and steel float in water whereas a small piece of iron sinks in it ?

Solution :
A ship made of iron and steel is a hollow object which contains a lot of air in it. Due to the
presence of a lot of air in it, the average density of the ship becomes less than the density of
water. Hence a ship floats in water.
On the other hand, a piece of iron is denser than water, so it sinks in water.

Question 48:
Why do camels have large flat feet ?



Solution :
Camels have large flat feet so that there is a greater area in contact with the sand which
produces less pressure on the sand and the camels can move easily on the sand.

Question 49:
Name these forces :
(a) the upward push of water on a submerged object
(b) the force which wears away two surfaces as they move over one another
(c) the force which pulled the apple off Isaac Newton’s tree.
(d) the force which stops you falling through the floor.
Solution :
(a) Buoyant force
(b) Force of friction
(c) Gravitational force
(d) Reaction force

Question 50:
A pressure of 10 Pa acts on an area of 3.0 m2. What is the force acting on the area ? What
force will be exerted by the application of same pressure if the area is made one-third ?
Solution :
If the area is made one-third i.e. 1m2, then the force would be:

Question 51:
A girl is wearing a pair of flat shoes. She weighs 550 N. The area of contact of one shoe with
the ground is 160 cm2. What pressure will be exerted by the girl on the ground :
(a) if she stands on two feet ?
(b) if she stands on one foot ?
Solution :
Force, F= 550N
Area of contact of one shoe =160 cm2 =160 x 10-4m2

Area of contact with two shoes =160 x 2 =320 cm2=320 x 10-4m2

Question 52:
3



Calculate the density of an object of volume 3 m3 and mass 9 kg. State whether this object will
float or sink in water. Give reason for your answer.
Solution :

The object will float in the water as the density of the object is less than the density of water.

Question 53:
An object weighs 500 grams in air. This object is then fully immersed in water. State whether it
will weigh less in water or more in water. Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
The object will weigh less in water because an upward force (buoyant force) equal to the
weight of water displaced acts on the object when immersed in water which reduces its
weight apparently.

Question 54:
(a) Write down an equation that defines density.
(b) 5 kg of material A occupy 20 cm3 whereas 20 kg of materia! B occupy 90 cm3. Which has
the greater density : A or B ? Support your answer with calculations.

Solution :
(a)

(b)
For material A:
Mass= 5kg
Volume =20 cm3 = 20 x 10 -6m3

For material B:
Mass =20kg
Volume =90 cm3 = 90x 10 -6m3

Density of material A is more than density of material B.

Question 55:
(a) Define buoyant force. Name two factors on which buoyant force depends.
(b) What is the cause of buoyant force ?



(c) When a boat is partially immersed in water, it displaces 600 kg of water. How much is the
buoyant force acting on the boat in newtons ? (g = 10 m s-2)
Solution :
(a) The upward force acting on an object immersed in a liquid is called buoyant force.
Factors affecting buoyant force:
(i) Volume of object immersed in the liquid,
(ii) Density of the liquid.
(b) The cause of buoyant force is the greater upward pressure exerted by water underneath
the object..
(c) Mass of water displaced = 600kg
Weight of water displaced, W =m x g
=600 x 10 =6000N
Since, the weight of water displaced by the boat is 6000N, therefore the buoyant force acting
on the boat will also be 6000N.

Question 56:
(a) State the principle of flotation.
(b) A floating boat displaces water weighing 6000 newtons.
(i) What is the buoyant force on the boat ?
(ii) What is the weight of the boat ?
Solution :
(a) According to the principle of floatation: An object will float in a liquid if the weight of object
is equal to the weight of liquid displaced by it.
Weight of object = Weight of liquid displaced by it.
(b) Weight of water displaced by boat= 6000N
(i) Buoyant force =6000N, as the weight of water displaced is equal to buoyant force.
(ii) Weight of a floating object = Weight of water displaced by it = 6000N

Question 57:
(a) Define density. What is the SI unit of density ?
(b) Define relative density. What is the SI unit of relative density ?
(c) The density of turpentine is 840 kg/m3. What will be its relative density ? (Density of water =
1000 kg/m3)
Solution :

Question 58:
(a) Define pressure.
(b) What is the relation between pressure, force and area ? ,
(c) Calculate the pressure when a force of 200 N is exerted on an area of:
(i) 10 m2

(ii) 5 m2

Solution :
(a) Pressure is the force acting perpendicularly on a unit area of the object.



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:126

Question 59:
(a) What are fluids ? Name two common fluids.
(b) State Archimedes’ principle.
(c) When does an object float or sink when placed on the surface of a liquid ?
Solution :
(a) Those substances which can flow easily are called fluids. All the liquid and gases are fluids,
like water, air etc.
(b) Archimedes’ Principle :
When an object is wholly (or partially) immersed in a liquid, it experiences a buoyant force (or
upthrust) which is equal to the weight of liquid displaced by the object.
Buoyant force on an object = weight of liquid displaced by that object
(c) If the buoyant force exerted by the liquid is less than the weight of the object, the object will
sink in the liquid. If the buoyant force exerted by the liquid is equal to or greater than the weight
of the object, the object will float in the liquid.

Question 60:
(a) How does a boat float in water ?
(b) A piece of steel has a volume of 12 cm3, and a mass of 96 g. What is its density :
(i) in g/cm3 ?
(ii) in kg/m3 ?
Solution :
(a) A floating boat displaces water equal to its own weight. This displaced water exerts
buoyant force to balance the weight of boat and keep it afloat.
(b) (i) Mass = 96 g
Volume = 12cm3

Question 61:
2



An elephant weighing 40,000 N stands on one foot of area 1000 cm2 whereas a girl weighing
400 N is standing on one ‘stiletto’ heel of area 1 cm2.

(a) Which of the two, elephant or girl, exerts a larger force on the ground and by how much ?
(b) What pressure is exerted on the ground by the elephant standing on one foot ?
(c) What pressure is exerted on the ground by the girl standing on one heel ?
(d) Which of the two exerts larger pressure on the ground : elephant or girl ?
(e) What is the ratio of pressure exerted by the girl to the pressure exerted by the elephant ?
Solution :
Weight of elephant=40000N
Area of one foot =1000 cm2= 1000 x 10-4m2

Weight of girl=400N
Area of heel of girl =1 cm2=1 x 10 -4m2

(a) Elephant has a larger weight of 40000N, therefore, elephant exerts a larger force on the
ground. Elephant exerts a larger force on the ground by 40000N – 400 N=39600N.
(b)Weight of elephant = 40000N
Area of one foot =1000cm2= 1000 x 10-4m2

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:127

Question 72:
If two equal weights of unequal volumes are balanced in air, what will happen when they are
completely dipped in water ? Why ?
Solution :
The two equal weights of unequal volumes which are balanced in air, will get imbalanced when
they are completely dipped in water because due to their unequal volumes, they will displace
unequal volumes of water and hence suffer unequal loss in weight.



Question 73:
Two different bodies are completely immersed in water and undergo the same loss in weight.
Is it necessary that their weights in air should also be the same ? Explain.
Solution :
No, it is not necessary that their weights in air should also be the same. This is because the
two bodies have undergone the same loss in weight on completely immersing in water due to
their equal volumes and not because of their equal weights, so they may have different
weights in air.

Question 74:
A body floats in kerosene of density 0.8 x 103 kg/m3 up to a certain mark. If the same body is
placed in water of density 1.0 x 103 kg/m3, will it sink more or less ? Give reason for your
answer.
Solution :
The body will sink less in water. This is because the density of water is more than that of
kerosene due to which water will exert a greater upward buoyant force on the body.

Question 75:
Giving reasons state the reading on a spring balance when it is attached to a floating block of
wood which weighs 50 g in air.
Solution :
The reading on spring balance will be zero. This is because the weight of floating block of
wood is fully supported by the liquid in which it is floating and hence it does not exert any
force on the spring balance.

Question 76:
If a fresh egg is put into a beaker filled with water, it sinks. On dissolving a lot of salt in the
water, the egg begins to rise and then floats. Why ?
Solution :
When a lot of salt is dissolved in water, then the density of salt solution becomes much more
than pure water. Due to its much higher density, the salt solution exerts a greater upward
buoyant force on the egg making it rise and then float.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 9 Solutions Page No:128

Question 77:
A beaker full of water is suspended from a spring balance. Will the reading of the balance
change :
(a) if a cork is placed in water ?
(b) if a piece of heavy metal is placed in it ?
Give reasons for your answer.
Solution :
The reading of spring balance will not change if a cork is placed in water because cork, being
lighter than water, floats in water.
(b)The reading of spring balance will change if a piece of heavy metal is placed in
water because heavy metal being denser than water, sinks in water.

Question 78:
When a golf ball is lowered into a measuring cylinder containing water, the water level rises by
30 cm3 when the ball is completely submerged. If the mass of ball in air is 33 g, find its
density.
Solution :

3



Volume of golf ball = rise in water level = 30 cm3

Question 79:

72. A boy gets into a floating boat.

What happens to the boat ?
What happens to the weight of water displaced ?
What happens to the buoyant force on the boat ?

Solution :
a) The boat sinks a little more in water, that is, the boat floats lower in water.
b) The weight of water displaced (by the submerged part of the boat) increases.
c) The buoyant force acting on the boat increases.

Question 80:
A y kg sheet of tin sinks in water but if the same sheet is converted into a box or boat, it floats.
Why ?
Solution :
The sheet of tin sinks in water because the density of tin is higher than that of water. When the
same sheet of tin is converted into a box or a boat, then due to the trapping of lot of ‘light’ air in
the box or boat, the average density of the box or boat made of tin sheet becomes lower than
that of water and hence it floats in water.



Tissues
PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page No – 165.

Solution 1:

Importance of tissues-
(i) Formations of tissues have brought about a division of labour in multicellular organisms.
(ii) Tissues become organised to form organs and organs organise into organ system.

Solution 2:

Plants are autotrophic organisms, so prepare their own food by photosynthesis. Moreover
plants are stationary or fixed organisms; they do not have to move from place to place in the
search of their food. Since they do not consume or need much energy, so most of the plant
tissues are supportive, which provide them with structural strength. Animals are heterotrophic
organisms. They have to move in search of food, mate and find shelter, so they need more
energy as compared to plants. Most of the tissues they contain are living.

Solution 3:

Plant Tissues
1. They require less maintenance energy.
2. There is a differentiation of meristematic and permanent tissues.

Animal Tissues:
1. They require more maintenance energy.
2. Such a differentiation is absent in them.

Solution 4:
They are located at the base of leaves or internodes, e.g., stems of grasses and other monocots.
Such tissues also occur below the nodes. It produces an increase in the length of an organ such
as leaves and internodes.

Solution 5:
(i) Apical meristem – It brings about the elongation of the root and stem.
(ii) Lateral meristem – It causes the organ (stem or root) to increase in diameter and girth.

Solution 6:
Simple permanent tissues – These tissues are composed of cells which are structurally and



functionally similar.

There are three types of simple permanent tissues:
(i) Parenchyma – Parenchyma cells are living and posses the power of division. The cell wall is
thin and encloses a dense cytoplasm which contains a small nucleus and surrounds a large
central vacuole.

(ii) Collenchyma – Its tissues consists of living cells. It is characterized by the deposition of extra
cellulose at the corners of the cells. In collenchymas, intercellular spaces are generally absent.
Collenchyma cells are elongated in shape. They often contain a few chloroplasts.
(iii)Sclerenchyma – Sclerenchyma cells are dead cells and they are devoid of protoplasm. The
cells walls of Sclerenchyma are greatly thickened of lignin. The cells of Sclerenchyma are closely
packed without intercellular spaces.

PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page No – 165.

Solution 7:
(a) Parenchyma

(b) Collenchyma



Solution 8:

Solution 9:



Xylem Tissue

Solution 10:
Functions of Collenchyma:
(i) It provides mechanical support and elasticity.
(ii) It provides tensile strength to the plants.

Solution 11:
Sclerenchyma cells are dead cells and they are devoid of protoplasm. The cells walls of
sclerenchyma are greatly thickened by lignin. The cells of sclerenchyma are closely packed
without intercellular spaces.

Solution 12:

Xylem:
1. It conducts water and minerals.
2. Conducting channels or tracheary elements are tracheids and vessels.

Phloem:
1. It conducts organic solutes and food materials.
2. Conducting channels are sieve tubes.

Solution 13:

Tracheids:



1. Single celled.
2. The end walls remain intact.

Vessels:
1. Made up of a row of cells.
2. End walls get dissolved and become perforated.

Solution SAQ – 1:

The different types of elements present in the phloem are:

(i) Sieve tubes – Sieve tubes are slender, tube-like structures composed of elongated thin-
walled cells, placed end to end. Their end walls are perforated by numerous pores and are
called sieve plates.

(ii) Companion Cells – It is a small thin-walled cell containing dense and very active cytoplasm
and large elongated nucleus.

(iii) Phloem parenchyma – These are thin-walled, living cells of parenchyma of phloem. They
have two functions, storage and slow lateral conduction of food.

(iv) Phloem Fibre – These are thick-walled, elongated spindled shaped dead cells which posses
narrow lumen. They provide mechanical strength to the tissue.

Solution SAQ – 2
Tracheary elements are the elements of xylem. Their function is to carry water and mineral
salts in upward direction from the roots to different part of shoots.

Solution SAQ – 3

(i) Parenchyma Functions:
(a) The main function of parenchyma is to store and assimilate food.
(b) Transport of materials occurs through cells or cell walls of parenchyma cells.

(ii) Collenchyma Functions:
(a) It provides mechanical support and elasticity.
(b) It provides tensile strength to the plants.

(iii) Sclerenchyma Functions:
(a) It is mainly mechanical and protective in function.
(b) It gives strength, rigidity, flexibility and elasticity to the plant body.



Solution SAQ – 4

Parenchyma:
1. The tissue consists of thin-walled living cells.
2. It is distributed in almost all the parts of the plant body.
3. The living cells of parenchyma assimilate and store food. They also store waste products.

Collenchyma:
1. The tissue consists of cells having localised thickening in their cell walls.
2. It occurs mostly in the aerial parts of the plants and is restricted to the other layers.
3. Collenchyma is the chief mechanical tissue in parts of a young plant particularly in the young
dicotyledonous stems.

Solution SAQ – 5:

Collenchyma:
1. It consists of living cells.
2. Its cells contain cytoplasm.
3. Its cell walls are cellulosic.

Sclerenchyma:
1. It consists of dead cells.
2. Its cells are empty.
3. Its cell walls are lignified.

Solution SAQ – 6
Xylem is composed of cells of four different types: 1. Tracheids; 2. Vessels or tracheae; 3. Xylem
parenchyma and 4. Xylem Sclerenchyma. Except xylem parenchyma, all other xylem elements
are dead and bounded by thick lignified walls. Vessels are shorter and wider than tracheids.
Vessels are very long tube-like structures formed by a row of cells placed end to end. Tracheids
are elongated cells with tapering ends. They also conduct water.

Solution SAQ – 7

Functions of Xylem:
(i) The main function of xylem is to carry water and mineral salts upward from the root to
different parts of shoots.
(ii) Since walls of tracheids, vessels and sclerenchyma of xylem are lignified, they give
mechanical strength to the plant body.



Solution SAQ – 8
Functions of Phloem:
Phloem transports photosynthetically prepared food materials from the leaves to the storage
organs and later from storage organs to the growing regions of the plant body.

Solution SAQ – 9
The different types of plant tissues are:
1. Meristematic tissues – It is of three types: Apical, Lateral and Intercalary.
2. Permanent Tissue – It of two types: Simple and Complex tissues. Simple tissues are of three
types – Parenchyma, Collenchyma and Sclerenchyma.
Complex tissues are of two types – Xylem and Phloem.

Solution SAQ – 10
Sieve tube elements do not have nuclei but have cytoplasm. They are dependent on adjacent
companion cells which contains dense and very active cytoplasm and a large elongated nucleus.

Solution SAQ – 11
Functions of Epithelial tissues are:
(i) The cells of the body surface form the outer layer of skin. These cells protect the underlying
cells from drying, injury, and chemical effects.
(ii) Inside the body, epithelial cells form lining of mouth and alimentary canal and protect these
organs.
(iii) Epithelial tissues help in absorption of water and nutrients in small intestine.
(iv) Some epithelial tissues perform secretory function such as sweat, saliva in skin and mouth
cavity.

Solution SAQ – 12
(i) Striated Muscles – It occur in the muscles of limbs, body wall, face, neck, etc. Striated
muscles present in tongue, pharynx, diaphragm and upper part of oesophagus are called
visceral straited muscles.
(ii) Smooth Muscles – Smooth muscles are found in the walls of the hollow (tubular) visceral
organs except that of the heart. They occur in the wall of alimentary canal and internal organs,
ducts of glands, urogenital ducts and blood vessels.
(iii) Cardiac Muscles – The cardiac muscles occur in the heart.
Solution SAQ – 13:
(a) Neuron – Nervous Tissue
(b) Dendrite – Nervous Tissue
(c) Cilia – Ciliated Epithelium
(d) Collagen fibres – Connective Tissue
(e) Elastin fibre – Connective Tissue



Solution SAQ – 14
(a) Osteoblast – It provides shape to the body.
(b) Chondroblast – It provided support and flexibility to the body parts.
(c) Goblet Cells – It is a mucus secreting epithelial cell which secrets mucus.
(d) Neuron – The dendrites receive impulses and the axon takes impulses away from the cell
body.
(e) Muscle Cell – They undergo rapid contraction for locomotion.

Solution SAQ – 15
Two characteristics of nerve cells are:
(i) They are highly specialised unit cells.
(ii) Neurons have the ability to receive stimuli from within or outside the body and to conduct
(send) impulses (signals) to different parts of the body.

Solution SAQ – 16
Bone – It provides skeletal support to the body.
Cartilage – It provides support and flexibility to the body parts.
Ligament – It connects bones to bones.

Solution SAQ – 17:
(a) Adipose tissues.
(b) Ciliated epithelium.

Solution SAQ – 18
Functions:
(i) It transports nutrients, hormones and vitamins to the tissues and transports excretory
products from the tissues to the liver and kidney.
(ii) The RBCs carry oxygen to the tissues for the oxidation of food stuff.
(iii) WBCs fight disease by engulfing and destroying foreign bodies.

Solution SAQ – 19
The different tissues in animals are:
(i) Epithelial Tissues – These are the protective tissues of the animal body. Depending upon the
shape and function of the cells, the epithelial tissues are classified as follows:
a. Squamous epithelium.
b. Cuboidal epithelium.
c. Columnar epithelium.
d. Glandular epithelium.
e. Ciliated epithelium.



(ii) Muscular Tissues – The muscular tissues form the contractile tissues and are made up of
muscle cells. On the basis of their location, structure and function, there are three types of
muscular tissues:
a. Striated muscles.
b. Smooth muscles.
c. Cardiac muscles.

(iii) Connective Tissues – The connective tissues are specialised to connect and anchor various
body organs. They are of five types:
a. Aerolar connective tissue.
b. Dense regular connective tissue.
c. Adipose tissues.
d. Skeletal tissues.
e. Fluid connective tissues.

(iv) Nervous Tissues – These tissues are specialised to transmit messages within our body. Brain,
spinal cord and nerves are all composed of nervous tissues.

Solution SAQ – 20:



Solution SAQ – 21:

Solution LAQ – 1:
Simple tissues – These tissues are composed of cells which are structurally and functionally
similar.



There are three types of simple tissues:

(i) Parenchyma – Parenchyma cells are living and posses the power of division. The cell wall is
thin and encloses a dense cytoplasm which contains a small nucleus and surrounds a large
central vacuole.

(ii) Collenchyma – It tissues also consists of living cells. It is characterized by the deposition of
extra cellulose at the corners of the cells. In collenchymas, intercellular spaces are generally
absent. Collenchyma cells are elongated in shape. They often contain a few chloroplasts.

(iii) Sclerenchyma – Sclerenchyma cells are dead cells and they are devoid of protoplasm. The
cells walls of Sclerenchyma are greatly thickened by the deposition of lignin. The cells of
sclerenchyma are closely packed without intercellular spaces.

Solution LAQ – 2:
Meristematic tissues are the tissues in which the cells divide continuously and help in increasing
the length and girth of the plant.



According to their position in the plant, meristems are of three types:

a) Apical Meristems – These are situated at the growing tip of the stems and roots and increase
the height of the plant.

b) Lateral Meristems – These are found beneath the bark and in vascular bundles of dicot roots
and stems. These are responsible for the growth of cambium and hence increases the girth of
the plant.
c) Intercalary Meristems – They are located at the base of leaves or internodes or below the
nodes. It increases the length of the plant.



Solution LAQ – 3:
Simple tissues – These tissues are composed of cells which are structurally and functionally
similar.
There are three types of simple tissues:
(i) Parenchyma – Parenchyma cells are living and posses the power of division. The cell wall is
thin and encloses a dense cytoplasm which contains a small nucleus and surrounds a large
central vacuole.

(ii) Collenchyma – It tissues also consists of living cells. It is characterized by the deposition of
extra cellulose at the corners of the cells. In collenchymas, intercellular spaces are generally



absent. Collenchyma cells are elongated in shape. They often contain a few chloroplasts.

(iii) Sclerenchyma – Sclerenchyma cells are dead cells and they are devoid of protoplasm. The
cells walls of sclerenchyma are greatly thickened by the deposition of lignin. The cells of
sclerenchyma are closely packed without intercellular spaces.



Diversity In Living Organisms
PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page No – 253.

Solution SAQ – 1
(a) Point Diversity – This is a diversity present on the smallest scale.
(b) Alpha Diversity – Also known as local diversity and includes variety of organisms local to a
particular habitat.
(c) Gamma Diversity – It represents the diversity of a larger unit such as an island or a
landscape.
(d) Epsilon Diversity – It is also called regional diversity and includes total diversity of a group of
gamma diversity areas.

Solution SAQ – 2
A single plant may be considered as a unit of alpha diversity; a leaf as an area of point diversity;
a group of plants occurring together as an area of gamma diversity and the forest within which
the plants are located as an area of epsilon diversity.

Solution SAQ – 3
Classification is essential to understand the inter-relationship among different groups of
organisms.

Solution SAQ – 4
The basis of classification is to study the diversity among living organisms in an effective way.

Solution SAQ – 5
There are two broad categories of cell structure: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic. Thus, two broad
groups can be formed – one having prokaryotic cell structure and the other having eukaryotic
cell structure.

Solution SAQ – 6
Seven categories of hierarchical classification are: Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus
and Species.

Solution SAQ – 7

Features of plants:
(a) The growth of plant body is often unlimited and continues till death.
(b) The asexual reproduction or vegetative reproduction is common in the plants.

Features of animals:



(a) They have definite shape and size.
(b) Animals have distinct excretory organs.

Solution SAQ – 8
The two kingdom system of classification was not found to be suitable to many scientists due to
large diversity among the organisms and many other limitations. The main demerits of the
system are –

(i) Many protozoans possess characters of both plants and animals. For example, Euglena has
animal characters but it contains chlorophyll.
(ii) Bacteria and Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) have many similarities between them and are
quite different from other organisms. Thus, it is difficult to place them in their plant or animal
kingdom.

Solution SAQ – 9:

Solution SAQ – 10:

Two characteristics of Kingdom Protista are:
(i) Some of the organisms use appendages, such as hair-like cilia or whip-like flagellum.
(ii) Their mode of nutrition can be autotrophic or heterotrophic.



Solution SAQ – 11:
Lichens occur in hostile habitats such as barren rocks, walls, tree trunks and icy regions where
they can be seen as slow growing large coloured patches. They are a source of essences, dhup,
havan samagri, some medicines and dyes.

Solution SAQ – 12:

Solution SAQ – 13:

Four General characters of Thallophyta are:
(i) It includes most primitive and simple plants.
(ii) There is no vascular system.
(iii) The reproductive organs are simple, single -celled.
(iv) There is no embryo formation after fertilization.



Solution SAQ – 14:

Algae:
(i) They contain photosynthetic pigments.
(ii) Algae are autotrophic.
(iii) The cell wall is made of cellulose

Fungi:
(i) Photosynthetic pigments are absent in them.
(ii) Fungi are heterotrophic.
(iii) The cell wall is made of chitin

Solution SAQ – 16:
Dicots:
(i) Leaves of these plants have reticulate venation.
(ii) Secondary growth occurs.
(iii) The plants have tap root system.

Monocots:
(i) Leaves of these plants have parallel venation.
(ii) Secondary growth does not occur.
(iii) The plants have adventitious root system.

Solution SAQ – 17

Bryophyta:
(i) Plant body is gametophytic.
(ii) Real stem and leaves are always absent.
(iii) Fixation of plant body is carried out by rhizoids.
(iv) Bryophytes are non-vascular in nature.

Pteridophyta:
(i) Plant body is sporophytic.
(ii) Real stem and leaves are present.
(iii) Fixation of plant body is carried out by roots.
(iv) Pteridophytes are vascular plants.

Solution SAQ – 18:
(i) Bryophytes are small multicellular green land plants. These simple land plants are confined
to shady damp places.



(ii) A true vascular system is absent in them.
(iii) The sex organs are multicellular.
(iv) An embryo is formed upon fertilisation.
Example: Riccia and Marchantia.

Solution SAQ – 19
(i) They are found mainly in shady or damp places.
(ii) The plant body is made up of root, stem and leaves.
(iii) They have well developed vascular system (xylem and phloem) for the conduction of water
and other substances, from one part of the plant body to another.
(iv) These plants have no flowers and do not produce seeds.
Example: Club mosses – Selaginella and Ferns – Marselia.

Solution SAQ – 20
(i) They are most primitive and simple seed plants.
(ii) The seeds produced by these plants are naked and are not enclosed within fruits.
(iii) They are usually perennial, evergreen and woody plants.
(iv) Sporophylls are aggregated to form cones.

Solution SAQ – 21
(i) Angiosperms are highly evolved plants.
(ii) They produce seeds that are enclosed within the fruit.
(iii) The reproductive organs (sporophylls) are aggregated in flower.
(iv) Microscopes and megaspores are produced in the same or two different types of plants.

Solution SAQ – 22:

Nonchordates:
(i) Notochord is absent in them.
(ii) Their central nervous system is solid and ventral.
(iii)Their circulatory system is of open or closed type.
(iv) Heart, if present in them, is dorsal in position.

Chordates:
(i) Notochord is present in them at some of their developmental stage.
(ii) Their central nervous system is hollow and dorsal.
(iii) Their circulatory system is of closed type.
(iv) Heart is always present and is ventral in position.

Solution SAQ – 23
Porifera differs from Cnidaria in following characters:



Porifera:
(i) Cellular level of organisation.
(ii) Digestion is intracellular.
(iii) Appendages are absent in poriferans.
(iv) They contain special cells called collar cells or c hoanocytes.

Cnidaria:
(i) Tissue level of organisation.
(ii) Digestion is both extracellular and intracellular.
(iii) They have appendages in the form of tentacles.
(iv) They contain special cells called cnidoblasts which contain nematocysts.

Solution SAQ – 24
A polyp is a cylinder with tentacles at the top. The Hydra looks like a tin can with slender arms
coming from the top of its body. This body form does not move and the animals are trappers.
The medusa is an umbrella shaped structure with tentacles hanging down from it. The jellyfish
is an example. These animals move. During the reproductive stages of the jellyfish there is a
time when they take on the polyp form. Then they bud off and become medusa.

Solution SAQ – 25

(i) Sessile, sedentary, and marine except one group that lives in fresh water. These are non-
motile animals attached to some solid support.
(ii) Simplest multicellular, diploblastic animals.
(iii) The body design involves minimal differentiation and division into tissues.
(iv) Asymmetrical or radically symmetrical.
Example: Sponges and Sycon.

Solution SAQ – 26
(i) Cnidarians or coelenterates are multicellular, diploblastic animals with tissue grade of
organisation. A gelatinous layer called mesoglea persists between the ectoderm and endoderm.
(ii) Body shows radial symmetry.
(iii) Respiratory, circulatory and excretory organs are absent.
(iv) Nervous system is primitive, has only network of nerve cells.
Example: Hydra and Aurelia (jelly-fish)

PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page No – 254.



Solution SAQ – 27:

Bilateral symmetry:
(i) Limbs and organs are paired.
(ii) Cephalization is present.
(iii) The animal body can be divided into two equal halves by one plane called mid-sagittal
plane.

Radial symmetry:
(i) Limbs and organs occur all around the central axis.
(ii) Cephalization is absent.
(iii) The animal’s body can be divided into two equal halves by any vertical plane passing
through the
central axis.

Solution SAQ – 28:
(i) Transparent body with biradial symmetry.
(ii) Two tentacles and eight longitudinal rows of ciliary comb-plates for locomotion are present.
(iii) Marine, solitary and free-swimming.
(iv) No polymorphism or dimorphism occurs.
Example: Pleurobrachia and Cestum.

Solution SAQ – 29
(i) Bilaterally symmetrical and dorsoventrally flattened animals.
(ii) Body thin, soft, leaf-like or ribbon-like.
(iii) Digestive cavity (when present) with a single opening, the mouth (anus is absent).
(iii) Suckers and hooks are usually present.
(iv) Circulatory and respiratory systems and skeleton are absent.
Example: Fasciola (liver-fluke) and Taenia solium (pork tape-worm)

Solution SAQ – 30
(i) Bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic, pseudocoelomate and unsegmented animals.
(ii) Body is worm-like, cylindrical or flattened.
(iii) Body is covered with a tough, resistant cuticle; cilia absent.
(iv) Sexes are separate.
Example: Ascaris (round-worm) and Ancylostoma (hook-worm).

Solution SAQ – 31
(i) Body triploblastic, bilaterally symmetrical, soft, elongated, vermiform and cylindrical or
dorsoventrally flattened.
(ii) Exoskeleton absent; body is covered by a thin cuticle.



(iii) Alimentary canal is tube-like, complete and extends straight from mouth to anus.
(iv) Reproduction is by sexual means. Sexes may be united (hermaphroditic) or separate.
Example: Nereis (sand worm) and Hirudinaria (leech).

Solution SAQ – 32
An individual which has both type of sex organs is called a hermaphrodite.
Example: Liver fluke, tape-worm.

Solution SAQ – 33
Triploblastic animals are the ones with three germ layers (a mesoderm as well as ectoderm and
endoderm). The mesoderm allows them to develop true organs.
Example: Flat worms and humans.

Solution SAQ – 34
A coelomate animal is the one which has a body cavity in which well developed organs can be
accommodated.
Example: Earthworm and Hirudinaria.

Solution SAQ – 35
(i) Triploblastic, bilaterally symmetrical and metamerically segmented animals.
(ii) Body segments are grouped into two regions – cephalothorax (head and thorax together)
and abdomen, or three regions – head, thorax and abdomen. Anterior part of body forms a
distinct head, bearing sense organs and brain.
(iii) Exoskeleton of cuticle, containing protein, lipid, chitin and often calcium carbonate is
secreted by underlying epidermis and shed (moulted) at intervals.
(iv) Alimentary canal is complete; mouth and anus lie at opposite ends of the body.
Example: Palaemon (prawn) and Peripatus

Solution SAQ – 36:
(i) Body is soft, bilaterally symmetrical, with little segmentation and without appendages. The
size of body varies from a microscopic to a giant form such as Octopus of upto 50 feet.
(ii) Body cavity is haemocoel. True coelom is reduced and restricted to the pericardial cavity and
the lumen of gonads and nephridia.
(iii) Digestive tract has a simple structure.
(iv) Sexes are usually separate.
Example: Octopus and Sepia.

Solution SAQ – 37
(i) Simple animals may be a star like, spherical or elongated.
(ii) Body is triploblastic, coelomate, unsegmented and radially symmetrical.
(iii) Body lacks head but has oral and aboral surfaces. Oral surface of the body has five radial



areas called ambulacra.
(iv) Body wall is covered with spiny hard calcareous (calcium carbonate) plates (ossicles) that
forms a rigid or flexible endoskeleton.
Example: Echinus (sea urchin) and Asterias (star fish).

Solution SAQ – 38
(a) Palaemon.
(b) Musca.
(c) Asterias.
(d) Loligo.
(e) Pila.
(f) Unio.

Solution SAQ – 39
Echinodermata; The ambulacral system is the locomotive apparatus of the Phylum
Echinodermata (sea-urchins, star-fishes, etc), the most important feature of which is the
protrusible tube-feet that the animals can dilate with water at will, and thus move forward.

Solution SAQ – 40

(i) The body is boat shaped or stream lined.
(ii) Head, body and tail are compressed to make it suitable for locomotion in water, so that it
offers little or no resistance for swimming in water.
(iii) The pelvic fins, pectoral fins, dorsal fin, anal and caudal fins act as paddles and control the
direction of movement in water and provide balance.
(iv) The gills are well developed and suited for gaseous exchange in water.
(v) The lateral line receptors enable the fish to detect any changes caused by mechanical
disturbances in the surrounding water.
(vi) The presence of air bladders in many bony fishes acts as an accessory respiratory organ as
well as an organ for buoyancy. Using these bladders the fishes are able to maintain themselves
at desired depths.
(vii) The body is covered with scales.
(viii) The presence of a third membrane called the nictitating membrane in the eye.

Solution SAQ – 41

(i) Marine fishes with completely cartilaginous endoskeleton are called chondrichthyes. They
are generally large in size.
(ii) Streamlined body is either laterally compressed or spindle-shaped or dorsoventrally
flattened and disc shaped.



(iii) Mouth is ventral in position.
(iv) Skin is tough and covered with minute placoid scales.
Example: Scoliodon (dog fish) and Torpedo ( electric ray)

Solution SAQ – 42
(i) Osteichthyes are marine and fresh water fishes with partly or whole bony endoskeleton.
(ii) Body is generally spindle shaped.
(iii) Skin is either naked or covered with cycloid or ctenoid scales.
(iv) Heart is two chambered containing one auricle and one ventricle.
Example: Labeo (Rohu) and Synchiropus splendidus (mandarin fish)

Solution SAQ – 43:
(a) Cartilaginous fishes:
(i) They have a cartilaginous endoskeleton.
(ii) They contain five to seven pairs of gill slits.
(iii) Their mouth is ventral in position.
(iv) Swim bladder is absent in them.

Bony fishes:
(i) They have a bony endoskeleton.
(ii) They contain four pairs of gill slits.
(iii) Their mouth is terminal in position.
(iv) Air bladder is usually present in them

(b) Amphibia:
(i) Their skin is glandular, smooth and moist.
(ii) Scales are not present in them.
(iii) They have a three chambered heart.
(iv) Fertilisation is external.

Reptilia:
(i) Their skin is non-glandular, dry and keratinized.
(ii) Horny scales are present over their body.
(iii) Their heart is incompletely four chambered.
(iv) Fertilisation is internal.

(c) Aves
(i) Forelimbs are modified into wings.
(ii) The body is covered with feathers and scales.



(iii) Mammary glands are absent.
(iv) A toothless beak is present.

Mammals:
(i) Wings are absent except in bats.
(ii) Feathers and scales are absent. Hair is present.
(iii) Females have mammary glands.
(iv) Teeth are present. Jaws do not form beak.

Solution SAQ – 44
(i) Mammals are warm-blooded and the most evolved animals of the Animal kingdom.
(ii) Body is divisible into head, neck, trunk and tail. Moveable eyelids are present.
(iii) Females have milk-producing mammary glands which secrete milk for the nourishment of
the young.
(iv) Respiration is through lungs only.
Example: Human beings and Monkey.

Solution SAQ – 45
Flight adaptations of the birds are the following:
(i) Forelimbs are modified into wings.
(ii) Body is covered with exoskeleton of waterproof and lightweight feathers.
(iii) Long bones of endoskeleton are pneumatic having air cavities.
(iv) All birds are toothless; their jaws are modified into horny beaks.
(v) Body is streamlined to reduce air resistance during its flight.
(vi) Birds have air sacs helping in double respiration.
(vii) Flight muscles are well developed.
(viii) Tail feathers form a steering apparatus.
(ix) Birds have an acute vision.

Solution SAQ – 46
(i) Body is bilaterally symmertical, metamerically segmented, triploblastic and coelomate.
(ii) A post-anal tail present at some stage of life.
(iii) Segmental muscles in an unsegmented trunk.
(iv) Ventral heart, with dorsal and ventral blood vessels and closed blood vascular system.

Solution SAQ – 47
Protochordata is one of the groups of phylum chordata. Protochordata constitutes the marine,
small, primitive, or lower chordates. The members of protochordates lack a head, skull or
cranium, vertebral column and brain. About 2000 species are found in this group. This is further
divided into three subphylum: Hemichordata (e.g. Balanoglossus ), Urochordata (e.g.
Herdmania) and Cephalochordata (e.g. Branchiostoma) based on the position of notochord.



Solution SAQ – 48
(i) Urochordata: Herdmania.
(ii) Cephalochordata: Branchiostoma.

Solution SAQ – 49
Notochord is a transient mesodermal rod in the most dorsal portion of the chordate embryo. In
other words, notochord is an ensheathed flexible rod of turgid cells located along the back of
chordate embryos and some primitive chordates ventral to nerve cord. It provides place for the
attachment of muscles. Notochord has given rise to jointed axial skeleton of vertebral column.
Nerve cord is a collection of nerve fibres that runs throughout the length of an animal. It is
hollow and dorsal in chordates where it gets modified into central nervous system of brain and
spinal cord. Nerve cord is solid and ventral in nonchordates.

Solution LAQ – 1
The Linnaean system of classification consists of a hierarchy of graded taxonomic (named) ranks
that are called as taxa. Any given taxon (singular) may contain several lower taxa, which can be
usually distinguished based on certain common characteristics. Such lower ranks may in turn be
divided into a succession of progressively smaller ranks. The lower the rank of a group, the
more similar are the organisms grouped in it. If any two given organisms can be grouped under
the same lower rank or taxon, it implies that the two organisms are structurally, functionally,
embryologically similar and that they have had a comparable evolutionary history.
Within the living world as a whole, the biggest taxonomic rank is Kingdom. The next higher rank
within a kingdom is the Phylum or Division. It is customary to use the term phylum for major
groups in the animal kingdom and the term division for major groups in the plant kingdom. The
phylum or division is a broad grouping of more or less closely related organisms, sharing certain
common characteristics.
Each phylum or division has the next taxon called Class. The members of each class exhibit
certain distinguishing characters that are unique only to them.
In the same way, using comparable criteria of similarities and relationships, each class can be
divided into orders, each order into families, each family into genera and each genus into
species. Species is normally the basic or fundamental unit of classification. A species is
therefore the narrowest taxonomic category and kingdom is the broadest category in the
Linnaean hierarchy.
A typical Linnaean hierarchy has seven taxa represented as follows:



Solution LAQ – 2
Importance of classification:
(i) It makes the study of such a wide variety of organisms easy.
(ii) It projects before us a good picture of all life forms at a glance.
(iii) It helps us understand the interrelationship among different groups of organisms.
(iv) It serves as a base for the development of other biological sciences such as biogeography
etc.
(v) Various fields of applied biology such as agriculture, public health and environmental biology
depends on classification of pests, disease vectors, pathogens and components of an
ecosystem.

Solution LAQ – 3
Hierarchy is defined as sequence of categories in a decreasing or increasing order from kingdom
to species and vice versa. Kingdom is the highest rank followed by division, class, order, family,
genus and species. Species is the lowest rank in the hierarchy. The hierarchy has two categories
which are obligate and intermediate. Obligate means they are followed strictly and range from
kingdom to species as said above. Intermediate are not followed strictly and they are added in
obligate list such as subdivision, super family, super class, suborder, subspecies etc.;

(i) Species: Group of population which is similar in form, shape and reproductive features so
that fertile sibling can be produced. Some siblings can be sterile when a hybrid is produced. A



hybrid can be product of female horse and male donkey (Mule). Sexual reproduction is present
in eukaryotes. Species is followed by subspecies, varieties and races. These categories are
inferior as compared to species.
(ii) Genus: It is defined as group of similar species. But it is not mandatory to have many
species. Some genera have only one species known as monotypic. If there are more than one
species it is known as polytypic. For example lion, tiger are quite similar species placed under
the genus Panthera.

(iii) Family: It is defined as collection of similar genera. It can be separated from genera by
reproductive and vegetative features. For example, cats and leopard are included in the family
Felidae.

(iv) Order: One or more than one similar families constitute order. Family Felidae are included
in the order Carnivora.

(v) Class: One or more than one order makes a class. Class Mammalia includes all mammals
which are
bats, rodents, kangaroos, whales, great apes and man.

(vi) Phylum: It is a term used for animals while its synonym division is used for plants. It is a
collection of similar classes. Phylum chordata of animals has class Mammalia along with birds,
reptiles and amphibians.

(vii) Kingdom: The top most taxonomic category. Example all animals are included in Kingdom
Animalia. The unit in classification that denotes grouping of organism based on features which
are observable is known as Taxon.

Solution LAQ – 4
Kingdom Monera is the first of the five kingdoms of biological classification. It comprised most
organisms with a prokaryotic cell organization. For this reason the kingdom was sometimes
called Prokaryota or Prokaryotae. Prior to its creation these were treated as two separate
divisions of plants: the Schizomycetes (bacteria) were considered fungi, and the Cyanophyta
were considered blue-green algae. The latter are now considered a group of bacteria, typically
called the cyanobacteria.
Monera has been divided into Archaea and Bacteria, forming the more recent six-kingdom
system and three-domain system. All new schemes abandon the Monera and now treat the
Bacteria, Archaea and Eukarya as separate domains or kingdoms. To sum up:

(i) Kingdom Monera are one-celled without an organized nucleus. Examples: bacteria and blue-
green “algae.”



(ii) They have existed on earth longer and are more widely distributed than any other
organisms.

(iii) They are found in almost every imaginable habitat; in air, soil, and water and in extreme
temperatures and harsh chemical environments.

(iv) Their one distinguishing characteristic is that there are no membrane bound “organelles”.

(v) Pre dominant mode of nutrition is absorption but some may be photosynthetic or
chemosynthetic.

(Vi) Reproduction by asexual method.
(vii) True mitotic cell division absent.

Solution LAQ – 5
Characteristics of Kingdom Protista:
(i) They include many kinds of unicellular eukaryotic organisms such as unicellular algae,
protozoans and unicellular fungi.
(ii) They are found anywhere there is moisture.
(iii) They are single celled, but many live in a colonial setting (more or less independently).
(iv) Many are unicellular, but some are multicellular (Algae and fungus-like protists).
(v) Some can live in very harsh environments.
(vi) Reproduction can be sexual (conjugation), asexual (binary fission), or a combination of both.
(vii)Some of these organisms use appendages, such as hair-like cilia (e.g. Paramecium) or whip-
like flagellum (e.g. Euglena).
(viii) Their mode of nutrition can be autotrophic or heterotrophic.
Examples: Paramecium and Amoeba.

Solution LAQ – 6
Characteristics of Kingdom Fungi:
(i) Simple non-green plants which are not photosynthetic. They are heterotrophic and
eukaryotic organisms. Some fungi, such as Puccinia, Albugo etc are parasites and draw their
nutrients from living cells of their host plants. Some fungi, such as Mucor, Rhizopus etc are
decomposers, deriving their nutrition from dead remains of plants and animals.
(ii) They may be unicellular (yeast) or filamentous (most fungi). The body of a multicellular and
filamentous fungus is called a mycelium and is composed of several thread like structures
termed hyphae.
(iii) Fungi have a cell wall containing a mixture of chitin and cellulose. Chitin is a tough complex
sugar.
(iv) Their reserve food material is glycogen.



Solution LAQ – 7
The division Spermatophyta (sperma = seed, phyton = plant), as the name suggests, includes all
seed bearing plants. It has been divided into two sub divisions- Gymnosperms and
Angiosperms. The sub-division Gymnosperms (gymno = naked, sperma = seed) includes simpler
and primitive plants of the division Spermatophyta.
Gymnosperms: The gymnosperms are seed producing land plants. However, the seeds are not
enclosed in fruits. Most of them have now become extinct and only about 900 species are
known to be surviving. The living gymnosperms are widely distributed in the cold climates
where snow, rather than rain, is the source of water. Only one group called cycads thrive in
warmer regions. Example: Pinus.
Angiosperms: Angiosperms represent the most advanced group of vascular plants. They are
commonly called ‘Flowering plants’. They exceed all other major groups of living plants in
number and diversity.
Example: Sunflower

Solution LAQ – 8
Any simple vascular plant that produces spores, but not seeds, and has the diploid stage of its
life cycle as the dominant form is called a pteridophyte.
Ferns, Lycopodium, and Club mosses are all pteridophytes.
Bryophyta:
(i) Plant body is gametophytic.
(ii) Real stem and leaves are always absent.
(iii) Fixation of plant body is carried out by rhizoids.
(iv) Bryophytes are non-vascular in nature.
Pteridophyta:
(i) Plant body is sporophytic.
(ii) Real stem and leaves are present.
(iii) Fixation of plant body is carried out by roots.
(iv) Pteridophytes are vascular plants.

Solution LAQ – 9
(a) Characteristics of Platyhelminthes:
(i) Bilaterally symmetrical and dorsoventrally flattened animals.
(ii) Body is thin, soft, leaf-like or ribbon-like.
(iii) Digestive cavity (when present) with a single opening, the mouth (anus is absent).
(iv) Suckers and hooks are usually present.
(v) Circulatory and respiratory systems and skeleton are absent
(vi) Hermaphrodite i.e. both male and female reproductive organs occur in the same individual.
Example: Fasciola (liver-fluke) and Taenia solium (pork tape-worm).

(b) Characteristics of Nematoda:



(i) Bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic, pseudocoelomate and unsegmented animals.
(ii) Body is worm-like, cylindrical or flattened.
(iii) Body is covered with a tough, resistant cuticle; cilia absent.
(iv) Sexes are separate.
(v) Most forms are parasitic but some are free-living in soil or water.
Example: Ascaris (round-worm) and Ancylostoma (hook-worm).

Solution LAQ – 10

Characteristics of Annelida:
(i) Body triploblastic, bilaterally symmetrical, soft, elongated, vermiform and cylindrical or
dorsoventrally flattened.
(ii) Exoskeleton absent; body is covered by a thin cuticle.
(iii) Alimentary canal is tube-like, complete and extends straight from mouth to anus.
(iv) Reproduction is by sexual means. Sexes may be united (hermaphroditic) or separate.
(v) True coelomate animals with closed blood vascular system. Coelom allows true organs to be
packaged in the body structure.
(vi) They live in a variety of habitats. Mostly aquatic, marine or fresh water. Some are
terrestrial, burrowing in tubes while some are free-living forms.

Different classes and examples:
Class I: Polychaeta – Nereis (sand worm)
Class II: Oligochaeta – Pheretima (earthworm)
Class III: Hirudinea: Hirudinaria (Indian cattle leech)

Solution LAQ – 11

Characteristics of Mollusca:
(i) Body is soft, bilaterally symmetrical, with little segmentation and without appendages. The
size of body varies from a microscopic to a giant form such as Octopus of upto 50 feet.
(ii) Body cavity is haemocoel. True coelom is reduced and restricted to the pericardial cavity and
the lumen of gonads and nephridia.
(iii) Digestive tract has a simple structure.
(iv) Sexes are usually separate.
(v) Respiration through gills, mantle or a “lung” of the mantle.
(vi) Circulatory system is open except in cephalopods.
(vii) Excretion by a pair of metanephridia or kidneys.

Classes and their examples:
(i) Gastropoda: Pila (apple snail)



(ii) Pelecypoda: Unio (fresh water mussel)
(iii) Cephalopoda: Loligo (squid)

Solution LAQ – 12
Characteristics of Arthropoda:
(i) Triploblastic, bilaterally symmetrical and metamerically segmented animals.
(ii) Body segments are grouped into two regions – cephalothorax (head and thorax together)
and abdomen, or three regions – head, thorax and abdomen. Anterior part of body forms a
distinct head, bearing sense organs and brain.
(iii) Exoskeleton of cuticle, containing protein, lipid, chitin and often calcium carbonate is
secreted by underlying epidermis and shed (moulted) at intervals.
(iv) Alimentary canal is complete; mouth and anus lie at opposite ends of the body.
(v) Respiration through general body surface, by gills, air tubes (tracheae) or book-lungs.
(vi) True nephridia absent. Excretion by coelomoducts, malphigian tubules or green or coaxl
glands.
(vii) Sexes are usually separate; sexual dimorphism is well marked in several forms.
(viii) Fertilisation is usually internal, oviparous or ovoviviparous and often with metamorphosis.

Classes and their examples:
(i) Crustacea: Palaemon (prawn)
(ii) Myriapoda: Scolopendra (centipede)
(iii) Insecta: Lepisma (Silver fish)
(iv) Arachnida: Limulus (king crab)

Solution LAQ – 13
(1) Phylum Porifera – Sessile, sedentary, and marine except one group that lives in fresh water.
These are non-motile animals attached to some solid support.
Example: Sponges

(2) Phylum Coelenterata – Cnidarians or coelenterates are multicellular, diploblastic animals
with tissue grade of organisation. A gelatinous layer called mesoglea persists between the
ectoderm and endoderm.
Example: Aurelia (jelly-fish)

(3) Phylum Platyhelminthes – Bilaterally symmetrical and dorsoventrally flattened animals with
a soft, leaf-like or ribbon-like thin body.
Example: Taenia Solium (pork tape-worm)

(4) Phylum Nematoda – Bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic, pseudocoelomate and



unsegmented animals. Body is worm-like, cylindrical or flattened.
Example: Ascaris (round-worm)

(5) Phylum Annelida – Body triploblastic, bilaterally symmetrical, soft, elongated, vermiform
and cylindrical or dorsoventrally flattened, exoskeleton absent; body is covered by a thin
cuticle.
Example: Hirudinaria (Indian cattle leech)

(6) Phylum Arthropoda – Body segments are grouped into two regions – cephalothorax (head
and thorax together) and abdomen, or three regions – head, thorax and abdomen. Anterior
part of body forms a distinct head, bearing sense organs and brain.
Example: Palaemon (prawn)

(7) Phylum Mollusca – Body is soft, bilaterally symmetrical, with little segmentation and without
appendages. The size of body varies from a microscopic to a giant form such as Octopus of upto
50 feet.
Example: Octopus (devil fish)

(8) Phylum Echinodermata – Simple animals may be a star like, spherical or elongate with body
triploblastic, coelomate, unsegmented and radially symmetrical.
Example: Echinus (sea urchin)

(9) Phylum Chordata – Chordates are characterised by the following three features: (a) a dorsal,
hollow, tubular nerve cord; (b) a pliable rod called notochord that occurs ventral to nerve cord
and is replaced by a bone or cartilage to form a vertebral column in vertebrates; and (c) paired
gill-slits in the pharynx.
Example: Fishes

Solution LAQ – 14
Characters of birds:-
(i) Forelimbs are modified into wings.
(ii) The body is covered with feathers and scales.
(iii) Mammary glands are absent.
(iv) A toothless beak is present.
(v) Skin is dry only, a single preen gland is present.
(vi) A diaphragm is absent.
(vii) Bones of birds are hollow or pneumatic.
(viii) Larynx of birds is non-functional.
(ix) Lungs contain external air sacs.
(x) Birds are oviparous.
Example: Crow and peacock.



Characters of mammals:-
(i) Wings are absent except in bats.
(ii) Feathers and scales are absent. Hair is present.
(iii) Females have mammary glands.
(iv) Teeth are present. Jaws do not form beak.
(v) Skin bears a number of sweat and oil glands.
(vi) Diaphragm is present.
(vii) Bones of mammals do not have air cavities.
(viii) Larynx of mammals is functional.
(ix) Lungs do not have external air sacs.
(x) Mammals are viviparous.
Example: Human beings and monkeys.

Solution LAQ – 15
The subphylum ‘Gnathostomata’ is divided into six different classes. Out of the six two classes,
Chondrichthyes and Osteichthyes combine together to form a super-class, called Pisces.

Chondrichthyes:
(i) Marine fishes with completely cartilaginous endoskeleton. They are generally large in size.
(ii) Streamlined body is either laterally compressed or spindle-shaped or dorsoventrally
flattened and disc shaped.
(iii) Mouth is ventral in position.
(iv) Skin is tough and covered with minute placoid scales.
(v) Heart is two chambered.
(vi) Excrete urea (ureotelic animals).
Example: Scoliodon (dog fish) and Torpedo ( electric ray)

Osteichthyes:
(i) Marine and fresh water fishes with partly or whole bony endoskeleton.
(ii) Body is generally spindle shaped.
(iii) Mouth is usually terminal in position.
(iv) Skin is either naked or covered with cycloid or ctenoid scales.
(v) Heart is two chambered containing one auricle and one ventricle.
(vi) Excrete ammonia (ammonotelic animals).
Example: Labeo (Rohu) and Synchiropus splendidus (mandarin fish)



 Structure of The Atom

Solution 01
Neutron is not present in ordinary hydrogen atom.
Solution 02
J. J. Thomson
Solution 03
Maximum of 2 e- can be accommodated in K shell of an atom.
Solution 04
Maximum of 8 e- can be accommodated in L shell of an atom.
Solution 05
Maximum of 18 e- can be accommodated in M shell of an atom.
Solution 06
Maximum of 32 e- can be accommodated in N shell of an atom.
Solution 07
(a). Maximum of 2 e- can be accommodated in innermost shell of an atom.
(b). Maximum of 8 e- can be accommodated in outermost shell of an atom.
Solution 08
Three subatomic particles present in atom are electrons, protons and neutrons.
Solution 09
Electron is negatively charged particle present in atoms of all the elements.
Solution 10
J. J. Thomson discovered electron.

Solution 11
(a). e-
(b). p+
(c). n



Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book Page No 192 Answers
Solution 12
(a). False
(b). True
(c). False
Solution 13
Nucleus is the central part of an atom in which protons and neutrons are held together.
Solution 14
K, L, M, N were the letters used by Bohr to represent electron shells in an atom.
Solution 15
Protons and neutrons actually determine the mass of atom.
Solution 16
Proton is the positively charged particle present in atoms of all the elements.
Solution 17
Electronic configuration of hydrogen : 1
Solution 18
Proton is 1840 times heavier than electron.
Solution 19
Hydrogen gas produces anode rays consisting of protons in the discharge tube experiment.
Solution 20
Nucleus was discovered by Rutherford in the alpha particle scattering experiment.
Solution 21
Positive charge on the nucleus is due to presence of protons.
Solution 22
(a). 8 electrons are present in outermost shell of Neon.
(b). 7 electrons are present in outermost shell of Chlorine.
Solution 23
(a). L shell can accommodate maximum of 8 e-.
(b). N shell can accommodate maximum of 32 e-.
Solution 24
(a). K shell can accommodate maximum of 2 e-.
(b). M shell can accommodate maximum of 18 e-.
Solution 25
(i). Chadwick discovered ‘neutron’.
(ii). Thomson discovered ‘electron’.
(iii). Goldstein discovered ‘proton’.
Solution 26
(a). Proton has relative charge of +1.
(b). Electron has relative charge of -1.
(c). Neutron has relative charge of 0.
Solution 27
(a) Atomic number
(b) Mass number
(c) 11
(d) 23
(e) 20
(f) Nucleus



(g) Electrons
(h) Protons
(i) 8
(j) 18
(k) Neutron
(l) Negative; Positive; No
Solution 28
Electron is a negatively charged particle found in the atoms of all elements.
The relative mass of an electron is 1/1840 u.
A charge of -1 is carried by an electron.
Solution 29

Solution 30
The deflection of fast moving alpha- particles through small and large angles in Rutherford’s
scattering experiment is the evidence for the presence of nucleus in an atom.
Solution 31
Important information furnished about nucleus in Rutherford’s alpha- particle scattering
experiment is:
(i). Nucleus of an atom is positively charged.
(ii). Nucleus of an atom is very hard and dense.
(iii). Nucleus of an atom is very small as compared to the size of an atom as a whole.
Solution 32
Most of the alpha- particles passed straight through the gold foil without any deflection in
Rutherford’s alpha- particle scattering experiment, this shows that most of the space in an
atom is empty.
Solution 33
There are equal no. of positive and negative particles in an atom, so it is neutral as a whole.
Solution 34
(a). Proton is present in same fixed no. in the atoms of any particular element.
(b). Atomic no. is characteristic for any particular element.

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book Page No 193 Answers
Solution 35
Protons are positively charged particle found in the atoms of all the elements.
Relative mass of proton is 1u.
Relative charge of proton is +1 C.
Solution 36

Solution 37
Difference between proton and neutron-
(1). Proton is positively charged while electron is negatively charged.
(2). Proton is much heavier than electron.
Solution 38
Two observations which shows that atom is not indivisible are-
(1). In J. J. Thomson’s experiment, the stream of cathode rays in the gas discharge tube
shows the presence of negatively charged subatomic particles called electrons.
(2). In Goldstein’s experiment, the faint red glow in the gas discharge tube shows the presence



of positively charged subatomic particles called protons.
Solution 39
(i). Formation of cathode rays tells about the presence of negatively charged electrons in all
the atoms.
(ii). Formation of anode rays tells about the presence of positively charged protons in all the
atoms.
Solution 40
The arrangement of electrons in various shells of an atom of the element is known as
electronic configuration of the element.
Electronic configuration of oxygen (atomic no. = 8) is (2,6)
Solution 41
Electronic configuration of element with atomic no. 12- (2,8,2)
So, K-2 ; L-8 ; M-2
Solution 42
(a). Nucleus is a small positively charged part at the center of an atom. Nucleus is positively
charged.
(b). Rutherford discovered nucleus of an atom.
Solution 43
Alpha – particles were used by Rutherford in his experiment on the discovery of nucleus.
Alpha – particles have +2 units of charge.
Solution 44
(a). There are 13 e- in each atom of the element.
(b). Electronic configuration of given element- (2,8,3)
K-2 ; L-8 ; M-3
Solution 45
Atomic No. – 18
Electronic configuration – (2,8,8)
The special thing about the outermost shell is that it is completely filled with the electrons.
Solution 46
The neutron is a neutral particle found in the nucleus of an atom. Its relative mass is 1 u. It has
no charge.
Solution 47
Electron has relative mass of 1/1840 u, proton has 1u and neutron also has 1u.
Electron has relative charge of -1u, proton has +1u and neutron has 0 relative charge.
Solution 48
Protons are positively charged particle found in the atoms of all the elements whereas neutron
is a neutral particle found in the nucleus of an atom.
Solution 49
Electron has relative mass of 1/1840 u and proton has relative mass of 1u.
Electron has relative charge of -1u while proton has +1u of relative charge.
Solution 50
Proton has relative mass of 1u and neutron also has relative mass of 1u.
Proton has relative charge of +1u and neutron has no relative charge.
Solution 51
Electron has relative charge of -1 u whereas neutron has no relative charge.
Also, electron has relative mass of 1/1840 u and neutron has relative mass of 1 u.
Solution 52
Protons and neutrons are collectively present in the nucleus at the center while electrons
revolve rapidly round the nucleus in fixed circular orbits called energy levels.
Solution 53



Solution 54

Solution 55
(a). The stream of particles coming out from cathode (negative electrode) are called cathode
rays. Cathode rays are negatively charged.
(b). When electricity at high voltage is passed through a gas at very low pressure taken in
discharge tube, stream of minute particles are given out by the cathode. These stream of
particles are called cathode rays.
(c). The conclusion is that all the atoms contain negatively charged particles called electrons.
Solution 56
(a). According to Thomson model of atom- An atom consists of a sphere of positive charge
with negatively charged electrons embedded in it. The positive and negative charges in an
atom are equal in magnitude.
Neutron was not present in the Thomson model of atom.
(b). When mass no. is 18 and no. of electrons is 7 then
(i). No. of protons = 7
(ii). No. of neutrons = 18 – 7 = 11
(iii). Atomic no. = 7
Solution 57
(a).Rutherford’s model of atom-
1. An atom consists of positively charged, dense and very small nucleus containing all the
protons and neutrons. Almost all the mass of atom is concentrated in the nucleus.
2. The nucleus is surrounded by negatively charged electrons. The electrons are revolving at
very high speed round the nucleus in fixed circular orbits.
3. The electrostatic attraction between the positively charged nucleus and negatively charged
electrons keep the atom held together.
4. An atom is electrically neutral.
5. Most of the space in an atom is empty.
The major drawback of Rutherford model of atom is that it does not explain the stability of the
atom.
(b).Given: Mass no. = 23
No. of electrons = 11
Then, no. of protons = 11
No. of neutrons = 23 – 11 = 12
Atomic no. = 11
Solution 58
(a). Bohr’s model of atom-
1. An atom is made up of three particles, namely electrons, protons and neutrons.
2.The protons and neutrons are located in the small nucleus at the center of atom.
3. Electrons revolve round the nucleus in fixed circular orbits.
4. Maximum no. of electrons for any given shell is fixed. Any shell cannot exceed that
maximum value.
5. Each given shell is associated with fixed amount of energy.
6. There is no change in energy of electrons as long as they keep revolving in the same energy
level, and the atom remains stable.



(b).Given: Atomic no. = 11
Mass no. = 23
Then, electronic configuration – (2,8,1)
Nuclear composition is – 11 protons and 12 neutrons

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book Page No 194 Answers
Solution 59
(a). (i). Atomic no. is the number of protons in one atom of an element.
(ii). Mass no. is the total number of protons and neutrons present in one atom of the element.
Example- The total no. of protons in a carbon atom is 6, so its atomic no. is 6.
Also, one atom of Na contains 11 protons and 12 neutrons, so its mass no. is 23.
(b). Mass No. = Atomic no. + No. of neutrons
(c). No. of neutrons = Mass No. – Atomic no.
= 24 – 12 = 12
Solution 71
(i). Mass no. = 31
(ii). Atomic no. = 15
(iii). E.C. = (2,8,5)
Solution 72
(a). E.C. – (2,8,7)
(b). Atomic No. = 17
(c). Non-metal
(d). Anion; X-
(e). X must be Chlorine
Solution 73
(a). Atomic no. = 3
(b). Mass no. = 3 + 4 = 7
(c). E.C. – (2, 1)
(d). Metal
(e). Cation will be formed; because outermost single electron can be easily donated.
(f). E+
(g). Lithium

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book Page No 195 Answers
Solution 74
(a). Mass number
(b). Atomic number
(c). No. of protons = 4
(d). No. of neutrons = 9 – 4 = 5
(e). No. of electrons = 4
(f). Electrons in outermost orbit = 2
(g). X2+
Solution 75
(a). Atomic no. = 18
(b). Element Z is non-metal
(c). As the outermost shell of element Z is completely filled so, it will not form any ion.
(d). Outermost electronic shell is completely filled with electrons.
(e). Name of element ‘Z’ = Argon
Symbol is Ar
(f). Z belongs to the group ‘Noble gases’.

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book Page NO 210 Answers



Solution 01
E.C of Nitrogen = 2, 5
So, no. of valence electrons in Nitrogen atom = 5
Solution 02
Noble gases
Solution 03
Helium has less than 8 electrons in the valence shell of an atom. Its atomic no. is 2
Solution 04
Radioactive isotopes are used in the treatment of cancer.
One such isotope is Cobalt-60.
Solution 05
Uranium-235 isotope is used as a fuel in the reactors of nuclear power plants for generating
electricity.
Solution 06
Cobalt-60 radioisotope is used in the treatment of cancer.
Solution 07
Iodine-131 radioisotope is used to determine the activity of thyroid gland.
Solution 08
Radioactive isotopes are used in industry to detect the leakage in underground oil pipelines,
gas pipelines and water pipes.
Solution 09
The given statement is false.
Solution 10
Atoms containing same number of protons and electrons but different number of neutrons are
called ISOTOPES.
Solution 11
Isotopes
Solution 12
The given pair are isotopes.
Solution 13
Radioactive isotopes have unstable nuclei and emit various types of radiations.
Solution 14

Solution 15
(a). M
(b). 3
(c). neutrons
(d). isotopes
Solution 16
(a). Atomic no. = 5
(b). Mass no. = 6 + 5 = 11
(c). No. of electrons = 5
(d). No. of valence electrons, per atom = 3
Solution 17
Atomic No. = 17
E.C. = (2, 8, 7)
Valency = 8 – no. of valence electrons = 8 – 7 = 1
Solution 18
Atomic No. of X = 16



E.C. of X = (2, 8, 6)
Valency of X = 8 – no. of valence electrons = 8 – 6 = 2

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book Page No 211 Answers
Solution 19
Valency shown by A (atomic no. 2) – 0
Valency shown by B (atomic no. 4) – 2
Valency shown by C (atomic no. 8) – 2
Valency shown by D (atomic no. 10) – 0
Valency shown by E (atomic no. 13) – 3
Solution 20
Uranium-235 : This isotope is used as a fuel in the reactors of nuclear power plants for
generating electricity.
Cobalt-60 : This is used in the treatment of cancer.
Solution 21

Solution 22
The difference in the masses of isotopes of an element is due to different number of neutrons
in their nuclei.
Solution 23
Because all the isotopes of an element have identical atomic configuration containing same
number of valence electrons, therefore, all the isotopes of an element show identical chemical
properties.
For example- Cl-35 and Cl-37, show identical chemical properties as they have same no. of 7
valence electrons.
Solution 24
Due to slight difference in the masses of the isotopes of an element, the physical properties of
the isotopes are slightly different.
Solution 25
The fractional atomic masses of elements are due to the existence of their isotopes having
different masses.
Solution 26
Deuterium, Protium and Tritium are isotopes.
Argon and Calcium are isobars.
Solution 27
(i). Due to identical electronic configuration containing the same no. of valence electrons,
these isotopes have almost identical chemical properties.
(ii). All of them have 1 electron and 1 proton, so, they are electrically neutral.
Solution 28

Solution 29
Isobars are the atoms of different elements having different atomic numbers but the same
mass number (or same atomic mass).
Solution 30
H – 1 proton, 1 electron and no neutron.
D – 1 proton, 1 electron and 1 neutron.



T – 1 proton, 1 electron and 2 neutrons.
Solution 31
Atomic No. = 7
E.C = 2, 5
Valency of given element = 3
Given element is NITROGEN.
Solution 32
(a). The number of electrons present in the valence shell are called valence electrons.
Valence electrons are situated in the outermost shell.
(b). There are 3 valence electrons present in the element with atomic no. 13.
Valence shell of this atom is M.
Solution 33

Solution 34
(a).The isotopes which are unstable due to presence of extra neutrons in their nuclei and emit
various types of radiations, are called radioactive isotopes or radioisotopes.
For example: Carbon – 14 , Arsenic – 74
(b). Uses of isotopes-
(i). They are used in the treatment of cancer.
(ii). Radioactive isotopes are used as ‘tracers’ in medicine to detect the presence of tumors
and blood clots in human body.

Solution 35
(a). The capacity of an atom of an element to form chemical bonds is known as its valency.
Valency of an atom with atomic no. 14 is 4.
(b). The valency of an element is either equal to the number of valence electrons in its atom or
equal to the number of electrons required to complete eight electrons in the valence shell.
Valency of metal = No. of valence electron in its atom
Valency of a non-metal = 8 – No. of valence electron in its atom
For example- Valency of sodium (metal) is 1 and that of chlorine (non-metal) is also 1.

Lakhmir Singh Class Page No 212
Solution 52



Solution 53

Lakhmir Singh Class 9 CBSE Chemistry Text Book Page No 213 Answers
Solution 54

Solution 55

Solution 56
A and B are the example of isobars. This is because they have same number of nucleons.
Solution 57
Mass no. of A and B is 40.
The two species are isobars.
A represents Argon (Atomic no. = 18) while B represents Calcium (Atomic no. = 20).
Solution 58

Solution 59
A and D are isotopes as they have the same number of protons.
Solution 60
(i). Mass number of X = 8 + 8 = 16
(ii). Mass number of Y = 8 + 9 = 17
(iii). X and Y are isotopes.
(iv). X and Y represent Oxygen.



Work and Energy

Solution 1
Mass = m
Height above the ground = h
Work done = Potential energy acquired by the body = m x g x h
where g is acceleration due to gravity
Solution 2
SI unit of work is Joule (J).
Solution 3
Work is a scalar quantity.
Work, as a physical quantity, requires only magnitude to be represented. Hence, it is scalar
quantity.
Solution 4
When a force of 1 newton moves a body through a distance of 1 metre in its own direction,
then the work done is known as 1 joule.
Solution 5
The condition for a force to do work on a body is that it should produce motion in the body.
Solution 6
Energy is a scalar quantity. It has only magnitude but no direction.
Solution 7
a)Unit of work is joule.
b) Unit of energy is joule.
Solution 8
The work done against gravity is zero when a body is moved horizontally along a frictionless
surface because force of gravity acts perpendicular to the direction of motion.
Solution 9
Kinetic energy will become four times when the speed is doubled because kinetic
energy is directly proportional to square of speed of the body

Solution 10
Mass = m
Velocity = v



Solution 11
Kinetic
energy will become one-fourth when the speed is halved because kinetic energy
is directly proportional to square of speed of the body

Solution 12
The kinetic energy of a body depends on
a) Mass of the body, m
b) Square of the velocity of the body, v2

Solution 13
Doubling the velocity would have a greater effect on kinetic energy.
Solution 14

Solution 15
a) Both kinetic and potential energy
b) Both kinetic and potential energy
c) Only kinetic energy
d) Only potential energy
e) Only potential energy
Note: In all the above cases we take ground as reference level where potential energy is zero.
Solution 16
Let masses of body A and B be m
Height of body A = h
Height of body B = 2h
Potential energy for body A, PEA = m x g x h
Potential energy for body B, PEB = m x g x 2h

Solution 17
Mass = 1 kg
Velocity = 2 m/s
K.E.

Solution 18
Potential energy is a scalar quantity as it has magnitude only and it does not require any



specification of direction.
Solution 19
Mass = 100 kg
Height = 5 m
g = 9.8 m/s2

P.E. = m x g x h = 100 x 5 x 9.8 = 4900 J
Work done is equal to PE acquired by the body.
Solution 20
False.
PE = m x g x h
= 1 x 9.8 x 1 = 9.8 J
Solution 21
The potential energy is doubled when the height is doubled since potential energy is directly
proportional to height, h to which body is raised.

Solution 22
a) Potential energy
b) Kinetic energy
c) Potential energy
d) Potential energy
e) Potential energy
Solution 23
a) Force ; distance
b) Zero
c) newton; metre; force
d) Energy; kinetic energy
e) mechanical
Solution 24
The work done by a force on a body depends on two factors
a) magnitude of force
b) distance through which the body moves
Work done is directly proportional to the force applied and the distance through which the
body moves.
W = F x s
where W is work done, F is force applied and s is distance through which the body moves.
Solution 25
Yes, it is possible that a force is acting on a body but still work done is zero. For example, in
the case of a man pushing a wall, the work done is zero despite of non-zero force, sin ce there
is no displacement of the wall.

Page 146
Solution 26
a) Work done by force applied by the boy is positive because this force is in the direction of
motion of the body.
b) Work done by the gravitational force is negative because this force is against the direction
of motion of the body.
Solution 27



Solution 28
Kinetic energy is directly proportional to the mass of the body, m.

Solution 29
(a) Positive work: Work done by the force applied by a person on a ball that is thrown upwards.
(b) Negative work: Work done by gravitational force of earth on a ball thrown upwards.
(c) Zero work: Work done by gravitational force of earth on a box that is sliding horizontally on
the ground.
Solution 30

Solution 31

Solution 32

Solution 33
Mass of body = 2 kg
Initial velocity u = 0
Time taken = 2 s
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 10 m/s2

Final velocity v
Using first equation of motion
v = u + gt = 0 + 10 x 2 = 20 m/s



Solution 34
Mass of scooter + scooterist = 150 kg
Initial velocity u = 10 m/s
Final velocity v = 5 m/s
Retardation = a
Distance covered= s
Using third equation of motion
v2 – u2 = 2as
52 – 102 = 2as
as = –75/2 ——(i)
Work done W = F x s
But F = m x a
So, W= m x a x s
Put the value of ‘as’ from eq(i)
W = 150 x (-75/2) = -5625 J
Neagtive sign implies that force of brakes acts opposite to the direction of motion.
Solution 35
Mass of rock = 10 kg
Height of ladder, h = 5 m
Initial velocity of rock, u = 0
Final velocity v
g = 10 m/s2

using third equation of motion
v2 – u2 = 2gh
v2 – 02 = 2 x 10 x 5
v = 10 m/s

Solution 36
Mass of car = 1000 kg
Initial velocity u = 20 m/s
Final velocity v = 10 m/s
Retardation = a
Distance covered = s
Using third equation of motion
v2 -u2 = 2as
102– 202 = 2as
as = -150 ——(i)
Work done W = F x s



But F = m x a
So, W= m x a x s
Put the value of ‘as’ from equation (i)
W = 1000 x -150 = -150000 = -150 kJ Neagtive sign implies that force of brakes acts opposite
to the direction of motion.
Solution 37
Height , h= 10 m
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 10 m/s2

i) Work done, W = m x g x h = 100 x 10 x 10 = 10000 = 10 kJ
ii) Potential energy of the body = work done = 10 kJ
Solution 38
Height, h = 100 m
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8m/s2

Work done by the boy, W = m x g x h = 50 x 9.8 x 100 = 49000 J = 49 kJ
Potential energy gained by the boy = work done by the boy = 49 kJ
Solution 39
Work done by a force applied on a body is
i) positive when the force acts in the direction of motion of the body.
ii) negative when the force acts in the direction opposite to the direction of motion of the body.
iii) zero when the force acts at right angle to the direction of motion of the body.
Solution 40
Mass of the box, m = 150 kg
PE = 7350 J
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8m/s2

PE = m x g x h
7350 = 150 x 9.8 x h

Solution 41
Mass of the body, m = 2 kg
Initial velocity, u = 20 m/s
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 10 m/s2

Height reached = h
Time, t = 2 s
Using second equation of motion
PE after 2 s = m x g x h = 2 x 10 x 20 = 400 J

Solution 42
Force, F = 1 N
Distance, s = 1 m
Work done W = F x s = 1 x 1 = 1 J



Solution 43
Force, F = 2.5 x 1010 N
Velocity, v = 5 m/s
Time, t = 2 minutes = 120 s
Distance, s = v x t = 5 x 120 = 600 m
Work done, W = F x s = 2.5 x 1010 x 600 = 15 x 10 12 J
Solution 44
A stretched rubber band is an example of a body possessing energy while it is not in motion.
The rubber band contains potential energy due to the change in its shape or configuration.
Solution 45
a)Gravitational potential energy of a body depends on:
i)mass of the body, m
ii)height to which the body is lifted, h
iii)acceleration due to gravity, g
b)
i.A moving cricket ball has kinetic energy
ii.A stretched rubber band has potential energy
Solution 46
Two examples where a body possesses both kinetic energy as well as potential energy are
i)a man climbing up a hill
ii)a flying aeroplane
Solution 47
Mass of man, m
Height of tree, h = 5 m
Work done, W = 2500 J
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 10 m/s2

W = m x g x h
2500 = m x 10 x 5

Solution 48
Work done, W =24.2 J
Distance, s = 20 cm = 0.2 m
Force, F
W = F x s
24.2 = F x 0.2
F = 24.2/0.2 = 121 N
Solution 49
Mass of boy, m = 40 kg
Height, h = 1.5 m
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 10 m/s2

i)At highest point, velocity, v = 0
Therefore KE = 0
ii)PE = m x g x h = 40 x 10 x 1.5 = 600 J
Solution 50
a) Potential energy
b) Both potential and kinetic energy



Page 147
Solution 51
Mass, m = 200 kg
Height, h = 2 m
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8 m/s2

i) Potential energy = m x g x h = 200 x 9.8 x 2 = 3920 J
ii) Work done is against gravity = Potential energy gained by the weights, therefore
Work done W = m x g x h = 200 x 9.8 x 2 = 3920 J
Solution 52
(a) Work is done when a force applied on a body produces motion in it.
Formula for work done:
W = F x s
where W is the work done
F is force applied
S is the displacement of the body in the direction of force
(b) Mass of the person, m = 50 kg
Height of tower, h = 72 m
Acceleration due to gravity = 9.8 m/s2

Work done W = m x g x h
= 50 x 9.8 x 72 = 35280 J
Solution 53
(a) Work is said to be done when the force applied on a body produces motion in it.
Work done by a body in moving up is given by
W = m x g x h
where W is the work done against the gravity
m = mass of the body
g = acceleration due to gravity
h = height through which the body is lifted above the ground
(b) Force, F = 2 N
Distance, s = 10 cm = 0.1 m
Work done W = F x s = 2 x 0.1 = 0.2 J
Solution 54
(a) When the displacement of a body is at right angles to the direction of foce acting on it, then
work done is zero.
(b) Force, F = 50 N
Distance, s = 4 m
Angle between direction of force and direction of motion,

Solution 55
(a) Energy is the ability to do work. SI unit of energy is Joule.
(b) Various forms of energy are:
1. Kinetic energy
2. Potential energy



3. Chemical energy
4. Heat energy
5. Light energy
6. Sound energy
7. Electrical energy
8. Nuclear energy
(c) Let masses of bodies be m
Velocity of one body, v1= v
Velocity of another body, v2 = 2v

Solution 56
(a) The energy of a body due to its motion is called kinetic energy
(b) When the velocity becomes zero, the kinetic energy also becomes zero since kinetic energy
is directly proportional to square of the velocity.
(c)

Solution 57
(a) The energy of a body due to its position or change in its shape is known as its potential
energy. E.g. a stretched rubber has potential energy due to change in its shape and water in the
overhead tank has potential energy due to its height above the ground.
PE = m x g x h
where, PE is the potential energy of the body,
m is the mass of the body,
g is the acceleration due to gravity,
h is the height above the surface ofearth.



(b) Kinetic energy of a body is due to motion of the body while potential energy is due to
position or change in shape of the body.
Kinetic energy is zero for a still body, while potential energy may or may not be zero for a still
body.
Kinetic energy of a body is directly proportional to its speed while potential energy is directly
proportional to the height to which the body is above the ground.
(c) Mass of ball, m = 0.5 kg
Speed v1 = 5 m/s
Speed v2 = 3 m/s

Solution 58
(a) The potential energy due to the position of the body above the ground is gravitational
potential energy and the potential energy due to change in shape and size of the body is
elastic potential energy. E.g. a stretched rubber has elastic potential energy due to change in
its shape while water in the overhead tank has gravitational potential energy due to its height
above the ground.
(b) Work done, W = 784 J
Mass, m = 20 kg
g = 9.8 m/s2

W = m x g x h
784 = 20 x 9.8 x h

Page 148
Solution 71
Work done is more on the bicycle because the truck does not move at all and the bicycle
moves through a certain distance. And work is said to be done only when applied force
produces motion in the body.
Page 149
Solution 72
The work done will decrease as the angle between the direction of force and direction of
motion is increased gradually because

Solution 73
The work done will be zero when angle between the direction of force and direction of motion
is 90o because



Solution 74
Work done will be maximum when angle between the direction of force and direction of
motion is 0o because

Solution 75
The work done is zero because the gravitational force acts along the radius of the circular
path, at right angles i.e. 90o to the motion of satellite.
Solution 76
Weight of man = Mg = 800 N
Weight of package = mg = 200 N
Total weight of man and package = Mg + mg = (M+m)g = 1000 N
Height of the summit, h = 1200 m
i) Work done = (M+m) x g x h = 1000 x 1200 = 12 x 105 J
ii) Potential energy of the package = m x g x h = 200 x 1200 = 2.4 x 105 J
Solution 77
Potential energy becomes maximum.
Solution 78
The work done by both X and Y are equal because irrespective of whether they reach the top
of building by using a spiral or slanted ladder, the vertical distance moved by them against the
gravity is same.
Solution 79
Yes, the kinetic energy of the ball thrown inside a moving bus depends on the
speed of the bus because the speed of the bus adds up to the speed with which
the ball is thrown inside the moving bus.
Solution 80

Page 162
Solution 1
The commercial unit of energy is kilowatt-hour.
Solution 2
One kilowatt-hour is the amount of electrical energy consumed when an electrical appliance
having power of 1 kilowatt is used for 1 hour.
Solution 3
Megawatt and kilowatt are the units of power bigger than watt.
Solution 4



1 watt is the power of an appliance which does work at the rate of 1 joule per second.
Solution 5
1 horse power = 746 watt
Solution 6
Power has watt as its physical unit
Solution 7
1 watt
Solution 8
Work done = 1200 J
Time taken = 2 minutes = 2 x 60 = 120 s

Solution 9
One kilowatt = 3.6 x 106 J
Solution 10
a) Power
b) Electrical Energy
Solution 11
1 kW-h of electrical energy is commonly known as unit of electricity.
Solution 12
A cell converts chemical energy into electrical energy.
Solution 13
Electric motor
Solution 14
a) Electric generator
b) Cell
c) Electric iron
d) Solar cell
e) Electric bulb
Solution 15
a) Speaker
b) Steam engine
c) Car engine
d) Gas stove
e) Solar water heater
Solution 16
a) Work
b) Joule ; second
c) kWh
d) conservation; transformed; created; destroyed
e) kinetic; potential

Page 163
Solution 17
Force, F = 400 N
Distance, s = 60 m
Time taken, t = 1 minute = 60 s
Work done, W = F x s = 400 x 60



Solution 18
At a hydroelectric power station, the potential energy of water is transformed into kinetic
energy and then into electrical energy.
Solution 19
At a coal-based thermal power station, the chemical energy of coal is transformed into heat
energy, whhich is further converted into kinetic energy and electrical energy.
Solution 20
Weight of the man = 500 N
Weight of the load = 100 N
Total weight = 600 N
Height of stairs = 4 m
Time taken = 5 s
Work done = mg x h = weight X h = 600 x 4

Solution 21
Power = 3 kW
Time = 20 s

Work done = power x time = 3 x 20 kWs = 60 kJ
Solution 22
Energy consumed = 600 kJ
Time taken = 5 minutes = 300 s

Solution 23
Power = 100 W
a) time = 1 s
energy = power x time = 100 J
b) time = 1 minute = 60 s
energy = power x time= 100 x 60 = 6 kJ
Solution 24
Power of 1 fan = 120 W
Power of 5 fans = 5 x 120 = 600 W = 0.6 kW
Time = 4 hours
Electrical energy = 0.6 x 4 = 2.4 kWh
Solution 25
A radio first converts electrical energy into kinetic energy and then into sound energy
Solution 26



In an electric bulb, electrical energy is first converted into heat energy and then into light
energy
Solution 27
Fan, washing machine, mixer grinder, water pump, hair dryer use electric motor
Solution 28
i) chemical energy to electrical energy
ii) electrical energy to heat and light energy
Solution 29
i) Maximum potential energy is present in the bob at point C as at point C bob is at maximum
height.
ii) Maximum kinetic energy is present in the bob at point A as at point A bob is at maximum
speed
Solution 30
Weight of the car = 20000 N= 20 kN
Speed = 8 m/s
Distance s= 120 m
Time = 100 s
a)Work done W = f x s = 20 x 120 = 2400 kJ
b) Power

Solution 31
a)The change of one form of energy into another form of energy is known as transformation
of energy, e.g. in a cell chemical energy is transformed into
electrical energy
b) a. When a ball is thrown upwards its kinetic energy gradually converts into potential energy
and potential energy
becomes maximum at the maximum height attained by the ball
b. When a stone is dropped from the roof of the building its potential energy gradually converts
into kinetic energy and kinetic energy becomes maximum when the stone is just above the
ground
Solution 32
a) Law of conservation of energy states that whenever energy changes from one form to
another form, the total amount of energy remains constant. Energy can
never be created nor destroyed, it transforms from one form to another. For example, when
electrical energy is converted into light energy in an electric
bulb, then some energy is wasted as heat during conversion but the total energy remains the
same.
b) Initially the pendulum is at rest. The bob is pulled to one side to position B to give it
potential energy due to higher position of B and then released, the bob
starts swinging
i. When the bob is at position B, it has potential energy but no kinetic energy
ii. As the bob starts moving down from position B to A, its potential energy starts decreasing
and kinetic energy starts increasing
iii. When the bob is at position A, it has maximum kinetic energy and zero potential energy
iv. As the bob starts moving down from position A to C, its kinetic energy starts decreasing
and potential energy starts increasing
v. On reaching the extreme position C, the bob stops for a very small instant of time and bob
maximum potential energy and zero kinetic energy.



Therefore at extreme positions B and C bob has only potential energy and at A it has only
kinetic energy and at other intermediate positions bob has both kinetic
and potential energy. Thus the total energy of the pendulum is same for any instant of time
(conserved)

Solution 33
a) The unit kWh stands for kilowatt-hour. One kilowatt-hour is the amount of electrical energy
consumed when an electrical appliance having power of 1 kilowatt is used for 1 hour. It
represents the amount of electrical energy consumed in 1 hour.
b) Power = 1000 W = 1 kW
Time = 60 minutes = 1 hour
Energy(kWh) = 1 x 1 = 1 kWh
Solution 34
a) 1 kilowatt-hour = 1 kW for 1 hour = 1000 W for 1 hour

Solution 35
a) Power is the rate of doing work.

Page 164
Solution 46
Mass of body = 1 kg
g = 10 m/s2



Solution 47
Since from point A total energy = PE + KE = 80 J
And according to the law of conservation of energy Total energy remains constant
a) PE = 0
Total energy = PE + KE = 80 J
KE = 80 J PE = 80 J
b) At point B KE = 48 J
Total energy = PE + KE = 80 J
PE = 80 J KE = 80 – 48 = 32 J
c) Law of conservation of energy
Page 165
Solution 48
No. of steps = 28
Height of each step = 28 cm
Total height = 20 x 28 = 560 cm = 5.6 m
Mass of student = 55 kg
g = 9.8 m/s2

time = 5.4 s
Work done = m x g x h = 55 x 9.8 x 5.6 = 3018.4 J

Solution 49
Weight of box = 100 N
Height = 1.5 m
work done = m x g x h = 100 x 1.5 = 150 J
potential energy = m x g x h= 100 x 1.5 = 150 J
iii. weight of 4 boxes = 400 N
time = 1 minute = 60 s
work done = 400 x 1.5 = 600 J



Solution 50
a) Electrical energy to sound energy
b) Sound energy to electrical energy
c) Electrical energy to light (and heat) energy
d) Chemical energy to electrical energy to light
energy(and heat energy)



 Sound

Solution 1
Yes, sound can travel through iron and as well as water.
Solution 2
No, sound cannot travel through vacuum.
Solution 3
Radio waves are used to communicate with one another on moon.
Solution 4
Solid – table
Liquid – water
Gas – air
Solution 5
Vacuum
Solution 6
Frequency
Solution 7
SI unit of frequency is hertz.
Solution 8
(a)Longitudinal wave
(b)Transverse wave
Solution 9
Speed of sound is more in steel (solid medium) as compared to water (liquid medium).
Solution 10
Sound travels faster in iron (being a solid medium).
Solution 11
Sound travels fastest in steel (solid medium).
Solution 12
(a)Sound travels slowest in gases.
(b)Sound travels fastest in solids.
Solution 13
(a) Speed of sound in copper = 3750m/s



(b) Speed of sound in aluminium = 5100m/s
Solution 14
It is more convenient to put the ear to the track to hear a train approaching from far away
because sound travels faster in solids than in air.
Solution 15
Speed of sound (at 20oC) in:
(a) Air = 344 m/s
(b) Water =1498 m/s
(c) Iron =5130 m/s
Solution 16
Supersonic aircrafts
Solution 17
Supersonic Speed
Solution 18
Supersonic speed refers to the speed of an object which is greater than the speed of sound.
Solution 19
It is common observation that in the rainy season, the flash of lightning is seen first and the
sound of thunder is heard a little later. That’s because, speed of
light is very high as compared to speed of sound in air.
Solution 20
Transverse and Longitudinal waves.
Solution 21
Transverse (water) waves.
Solution 22
Longitudinal (sound) waves.
Solution 23
(a) Longitudinal waves
(b) Transverse waves.
Solution 24
(a) Longitudinal waves
(b) Transverse waves
Solution 25
Transverse waves
Solution 26
An object should vibrate in order to produce sound.
Solution 27
Vocal cords vibrate in our voice box when we talk.
Solution 28
Tuning fork is used to produce sound in laboratory experiments.
Solution 29
The sound waves in air are longitudinal waves.
Solution 30
The conclusion from the observation is that the prongs of tuning fork are vibrating, and the
vibrating prongs carry energy which gets transmitted to surrounding medium.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:186

Solution 31
False
Solution 32
Slowest: Sound
Fastest: light



Solution 33
Supersonic is used to denote a speed greater than the speed of sound.
Solution 34
Sound travels faster in hydrogen ( speed of sound in hydrogen is 1284m/s)
Solution 35
The number 256 on tuning fork signifies the frequency of tuning fork.
Solution 36

Solution 37

Solution 38
Velocity of sound = Frequency x wavelength
Speed of sound in air is constant.
Hence, frequency x wavelength = constant
If frequency is doubled, wavelength is reduced to half.
Solution 39
The frequency in hertz is equal to the number of waves produced per second. In this case, 20
waves are produced per second, so the frequency of sound waves is 20 hertz.
Solution 40
(a) Vibrations
(b)Compressions; lower; rarefactions
(c)Hertz; wavelength; metres
(d) Vacuum
(e)Greater
(f) Decreases
Solution 41
Vacuum means empty space, region with no matter particles. Sound cannot travel through
vacuum because vacuum has no molecules which can vibrate and carry sound waves.
Solution 42
The maximum displacement of the particles of the medium from their original undisturbed
positions, when a wave passes through the medium, is called amplitude (A) of the wave.

Solution 43
(a) A wave in which the particles of the medium vibrate back and forth in the ‘same direction’,
in which the wave is moving, is called a longitudinal wave. These
waves can be produced in all the three media: solids, liquids and gases. A wave in which the
particles of the medium vibrate up and down, ‘at right angles’
to the direction in which the wave is moving, is called a transverse wave. It can be produced in
solids and liquids but not in gases.
(b) Sound is a longitudinal wave.



Solution 44
Due to the very high speed of light we see the ball hitting the bat first. And it is due to
comparatively lower speed of sound that the sound of hitting is heard a little later.
Solution 45
Light travels much faster than sound. Due to this, the flash of lightning is seen first and the
sound of thunder is heard a little later.
Solution 46
Light travels much faster than sound. Due to this, the flash of gun shot is seen first and the
sound of gun shot is heard a little later.
Solution 47
Sound waves in air: Longitudinal, Compression, Rarefaction
Water waves: Transverse, Crest, Trough
Solution 48
(a) Sound can be produced by the following methods:
(i) By vibrating strings (as in a sitar),
(ii) By vibrating air (as in a flute),
(iii) By vibrating membranes (as in a drum)
(iv) By vibrating plates (as in cymbals)
(b) Speed of sound wave= frequency x wavelength

Solution 49
This is due to the fact that when the ringing bell is held tightly with our hand, it stops vibrating
and the sound coming from it also stops.
Solution 50
Sound is produced by the following objects:
(i) Vibrating stretched strings of sitar
(ii) Vibrating stretched membranes of tabla
(iii) Vibrating prongs of a tuning fork
(iv) Vibrating wings of mosquito
(v) Vibrating air columns in flute.
Solution 51
In most of the cases, a sound producing object vibrates so fast that we cannot see its
vibrations with our eyes. The time inetrval between two successive vibration is lower than the
persistence of vision. Hence we see the object in static state and not in vibration mode.
Solution 52
Fill water in a beaker up to its brim. Touch the surface of water with the prongs of a sound
making tuning fork (which has been struck on a hard rubber pad). The prongs of tuning fork
producing sound splash water. This shows that the prongs of a sound producing tuning fork
are vibrating (moving forwards and backwards rapidly).

Solution 53



The sound of a gas travels through the vibrations of air layers so it reaches first, but the smell
of gas reaches the person through the actual movement of the air
layers, which takes more time.
Solution 54
Frequency is number of vibrations produced per second i.e. 128 Hz.

Solution 55
Velocity of wave= 340m/s
Frequency= 512 Hz
Wavelength=?
Speed of sound wave=
frequency x wavelength

Solution 56
The number of complete waves (or cycles) produced in one second is called frequency of the
wave.
The time required to produce one complete wave (or cycle) is called time-period of the wave.
The time taken to complete one vibration is called time-period.
Relation between time-period and frequency of a wave is:

Solution 57
A ringing bell suspended in a vacuum chamber cannot be heard outside because sound
cannot travel through vacuum as it has no molecules which can vibrate and carry
sound waves.
Solution 58
Frequency, f=1020Hz
Velocity, v=340m/s
Wavelength =?
Speed of sound wave= frequency x wavelength

Solution 59
A compression is that part of a longitudinal wave in which the particles of the medium are
closer to one another than they normally are, and there is a momentary reduction in volume of
the medium. It is a region of high pressure.



A rarefaction is that part of a longitudinal wave in which the particles of the medium are
farther apart than normal, and there is a momentary increase in the volume of the medium. It
is a region of low pressure.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:187

Solution 60
(a) Sound is that form of energy which makes us hear. Sound waves are longitudinal waves in
air.
(b) Sound cannot travel through vacuum. This can be shown by the following experiment:
(i) A ringing electric bell is placed inside an air tight glass jar containing air. We can hear the
sound of ringing bell clearly. Thus, when air is present as medium in the bell jar, sound can
travel through it and reach our ears.
(ii) The bell jar containing ringing bell is placed over the plate of a vacuum pump. Air is
gradually removed from the bell jar by switching on the vacuum pump. As more and more air
is removed from the bell jar, the sound of ringing bell becomes fainter and fainter. And when
all the air is removed from the bell jar, no sound can be heard at all. Thus, when vacuum is
created in the bell jar, then the sound of ringing bell placed inside it cannot be heard.
This shows that sound cannot travel through vacuum.

Solution 61
(a) Sound is produced when an object vibrates. For example, the sound of our voice is
produced by the vibrations of two vocal cords in our throat caused by air coming from the
lungs.
(b) When an object vibrates (and makes sound), then the air layers around it also start vibrating
in exactly the same way and carry sound waves from the sound producing object to our ears.
Suppose a tuning fork is vibrating and producing sound waves in air. Since the prongs of the
tuning fork are vibrating, the individual layers of air are also vibrating. Sound travels in the form
of longitudinal waves in which the back and forth vibrations of the air layers are in the same
direction as the movement of sound wave.



Solution 62
(a) If the air is gradually pumped out of the glass vessel, no sound of the electric bell can be
heard because vacuum is created in the vessel and there are no air molecules to carry sound
vibrations.
(b) Sound cannot be heard on the surface of moon because there is no air on the moon to
carry the sound waves.
Astronauts talk to one another on the surface of moon through wireless sets using radio
waves. This is because radio waves can travel even through vacuum though sound waves
cannot travel through vacuum.
Solution 63
(a) The number of vibrations per second is called frequency.
The minimum distance in which a sound wave repeats itself is called its wavelength.
The distance travelled by a wave in one second is called velocity of wave.
Relation between velocity, frequency and wavelength of a wave:
Velocity of wave= frequency x wavelength

Solution 64
(a) A wave in which the particles of the medium vibrate back and forth in the ‘same direction’,
in which the wave is moving, is called a longitudinal wave. These waves can be produced in all
the three media: solids, liquids and gases.

(b) Longitudinal waves:
(i) The waves which travel along a spring when it is pushed and pulled at one end.
(ii) Sound waves in air Transverse waves:
(i) The waves produced by moving one end of a long spring up and down rapidly, while other
end is fixed.
(ii) The water waves or ripples formed on the surface of water in a pond.
Solution 65
(a) A compression is that part of a longitudinal wave in which the particles of the medium are



closer to one another than they normally are, and there is a momentary reduction in volume of
the medium.
A rarefaction is that part of a longitudinal wave in which the particles of the medium are
farther apart than normal, and there is a momentary increase in the volume of the medium.
Longitudinal waves consist of compressions and rarefactions.

Solution 66
(a) The ‘elevation’ or ‘hump’ in a transverse wave is called crest. It is that part of the transverse
wave which is above the line of zero disturbance of the medium. The ‘depression’ or ‘hollow’ in
a transverse wave is called trough. It is that part of the transverse wave which is below the line
of zero disturbance of medium. A ransverse wave consists of crests and troughs.
(b) Speed of sound= 332m/s
Time =3 sec

Solution 67
(a) When we put our ear to a railway line, we can hear the sound of an approaching train even
when the train is far off but its sound cannot be heard through the air. This is due to the fact
that sound travels much more fast through the railway line made of steel than through air.
(b) There is no actual movement of air from the sound-producing body to our ear. The air
layers only vibrate back and forth, and transfer the sound energy from one layer to the next
layer till it reaches our ear.
This will be clear from an example: If we turn on a gas tap for a few seconds, a person
standing a few metres away will hear the sound of escaping gas first and the smell of gas
reaches him afterwards. The sound of gas travels through the vibrations of air layers so it
reaches first, but the smell of gas reaches the person through the actual movement of the air
layers, which takes more time. So, it is clear that the sound is not being transmitted by the
actual movement of air from the gas tap to person, otherwise he would hear and smell the gas
at the same time.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:188

Solution 81

Solution 82
(a) Given that there are four complete waves.



(b) Frequency = vibrations per sec x number of complete waves
= 30 x 4 =120 Hz
(c ) Speed = frequency x wavelength
= 120 x 0.05= 6m/s
Solution 83
Sound can travel through all the given materials.
Solution 84
(a) Z medium has no fixed shape and no fixed volume.
(b) W medium has a fixed volume but no fixed shape.
(c) Y medium has the same composition as that on the moon.
(d) X medium has a fixed shape and a fixed volume.
Solution 85
(i) The distance between two consecutive compressions or rarefactions is equal to its
wavelength. Hence,
wavelength is =20 cm= 0.20 m
(ii) Speed of wave =4 m/s
Wavelength=0.20 m
Speed of wave =frequency x wavelength
4 m/s = frequency x 0.20 m
Frequency

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:206

Solution 1
The reflection of sound leads to formation of echoes
Solution 2
Echo is repetition of sound caused by the reflection of sound waves.
Solution 3
The persistence or sound in a big hall or auditorium is called reverberation.
Solution 4
a) Megaphone and bulb horn
b) Stethoscope
c) Soundboard
Solution 5
Megaphone
Solution 6
a) Loudness
b) Pitch
c) Timbre or Quality
Solution 7
The loudness of sound is measured in decibel. Its symbol is dB.



Solution 8
Pitch helps us to distinguish between a man’s voice and a woman’s voice, even without seeing
them.
Solution 9
Pitch of a sound is directly proportional to frequency. Higher the frequency, higher is the pitch
of the sound.
Solution 10
(i) Loudness
(ii) Pitch
(iii) Timbre
Solution 11
Quality or timbre
Solution 12
Ears enable us to hear sounds.
Solution 13
Ear drum starts vibrating when outside sound falls on it.
Solution 14
There are three small bones in the middle ear- anvil, hammer and stirrup.
Solution 15
a) Hammer
b) Stirrup
Solution 16
The function of three tiny bones in the ear is to increase the strength of vibrations coming
from the ear drum before passing them onto the inner ear.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:207

Solution 17
Eustachian tube
Solution 18
Auditory nerve
Solution 19
Ear canal
Solution 20
We should not put a pin or pencil or any other sharp pointed objects in our ears because they
can damage the ear-drum and damaging of ear drum can make us deaf.
Solution 21
Ultrasound scans are used to monitor the growth of developing baby in the uterus of the
mother.
Solution 22
An ultrasound scan for fetus is better than X-rays because X-rays can damage the delicate
body cells of the fetus.
Solution 23
SONAR is used to find the depth of sea by using ultrasonic sound waves.
Solution 24
SO und Navigation And Ranging
Solution 25
Soundboard works on the principle of reflection of sound.
Solution 26
A megaphone is used to address a small gathering of people.
Solution 27
A stethoscope, based on the principle of reflection of sound, is used by doctors to listen to our



heartbeats.
Solution 28
Soundboard is a concave board which is kept behind the speaker on the stage of a big hall.
Solution 29
Curtains and carpets can make our big room less echoey.
Solution 30
No we cannot hear infrasonic waves and ultrasonic waves. That’s because the frequencies of
both these waves fall beyond the human audible range of frequencies.
Solution 31
Infrasonic sound
Solution 32
Ultrasonic sounds
Solution 33
Infrasonic sound waves
Solution 34
As the frequency increases the pitch of the sound also increases.
Solution 35
The loudness decreases with the decrease in the amplitude of sound.
Solution 36
Ultrasonic sound waves
Solution 37
a) reflected
b) frequency
c) amplitude
d) waveform
e) reflection
Solution 38
An echo is heard sooner on a hot day because the speed of sound in air increases with
temperature. So the speed of sound in air is more on a hot day, and an echo is heard sooner.
Solution 39
An echo is heard sooner in water because the speed of sound in water is higher than the speed
of sound in air.
Solution 40
The persistence of sound in a big hall due to repeated reflections from the walls, ceiling and
floor of the hall is called reverberation. If the reverberation time in a big hall is too long, then the
sound becomes blurred, distorted and confusing due to overlapping.
Solution 41
Reverberations in a big hall or auditorium can be reduced by the following methods :
i) Panels made of sound absorbing materials are put on the walls and ceilings of hall and
auditorium.
ii) Carpets are put on the floor to absorb sound and reduce reverberations
iii) Heavy curtains are put on doors and windows to absorb sound and reduce reverberations
iv) The seats in the hall are made from materials having sound absorbing properties
Solution 42
We hear more clearly in a room with curtains than in a room without curtains because curtains
are bad reflectors of sound. They absorb most of the sound falling on them, and hence do not
produce echoes. On the other hand, in rooms without curtains, there is a greater reflection of
sound due to which some echoes are produced.
These echoes cause a hindrance to hearing.
Solution 43
A megaphone is a large, cone-shaped (or funnel-shaped) device for amplifying and directing
the voice of a person who speaks into it. A megaphone works on the principle of multiple



reflections of sound.
Solution 44
A bulb horn is a cone shaped wind instrument which used for signaling in bicycles, cars, buses,
trucks and boats, etc. A bulb horn works on the principle of multiple
reflections of sound.
Solution 45
Stethoscope is a medical instrument used by the doctors for listening to the sounds produced
within the human body, mainly in the heart and lungs. It works on the
principle of multiple reflections of sound.
Solution 46

The soundboard is a concave board (curved board) which is placed behind the speaker in
large halls or auditoriums so that his speech can be easily heard even by the persons sitting at
a considerable distance. The sound board works as follows: the speaker is made to stand at
the focus of the concave soundboard. The concave surface of the soundboard reflects the
sound waves of the speaker towards the audience (and hence prevents the spreading of
sound in various directions). Due to this, sound is distributed uniformly throughout the hall and
even the persons sitting at the back of the hall can hear the speech easily.
Solution 47
a) The loudness of sound is a measure of the sound energy reaching the ear per second. It
depends on the amplitude of the sound waves.

b) 
Solution 48
(a)Pitch is that characteristic of the sound by which we can distinguish between different
sounds of same loudness. It depends on the frequency of the sound waves
(b)



Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:208

Solution 49
Quality (or timbre) is that characteristic of the sound by which we can distinguish between
sounds of same pitch and loudness produced by different musical instruments (and different
singers). The quality (or timbre) depends on the shape of the sound wave (or waveform)
produced by it.
Solution 50
When we strike a table lightly, then due to less energy supplied, the table top vibrates with a
small amplitude and hence a soft sound is produced. However if we hit the table hard, due to
greater energy supplied, the table top vibrates with a large amplitude and hence a loud sound
is produced.
Solution 51
Ultrasound is used in industry for detecting flaws in metal blocks without damaging them. In
hospitals, ultrasound is used to investigate the internal organs of the human body such as
liver, kidneys, uterus, etc.
Solution 52
Bats are able to fly at night without colliding with other objects because they emit high
frequency ultrasonic squeaks while flying and listen to the echoes produced by the reflection
of their squeaks from the objects or obstacles in their path. From the time taken by the echo to
be heard, bats can judge the distance of the object in their path and avoid it by changing the
direction.
Solution 53
Bats emit high frequency ultrasonic squeaks while flying and listen to the echoes produced by
the reflection of their squeaks from their prey. From the time taken by the echo to be heard,
bats can judge the distance of the prey in their path and catch it.
Solution 54
Ultrasound waves are made to pass through one face of the metal block and ultrasound
detectors are placed on the opposite face of the block to detect the transmitted ultrasound
waves.
(i) If the ultrasound waves pass uninterrupted through all parts of the metal block, then the
block is flawless.
(ii) However, if the ultrasound waves are not able to pass through a part of the metal block and
get reflected back, then there is a flaw in the metal block.
Solution 55



The ceilings of concert halls are made curved so that sound, after reflection from the ceiling,
reaches all part of the hall.
Solution 56

Solution 57
(a) Infrasounds include sounds of frequencies below 20 Hz.
(b) Audible sounds include sounds of frequencies between 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz
(c) Ultrasounds include sounds of frequencies above 20,000 Hz.
Solution 58
(b) Infrasonic waves: 10 Hz, 18 Hz
Ultrasonic waves: 30,000 Hz ,50,000 Hz

Solution 59
(a) Range of hearing in humans is 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz
(b) The sound frequencies that cannot be heard by a human ear are 10 Hz, 15 Hz and 40,000
Hz.
Solution 60
Time taken to listen the echo = 5 s
So time taken for

Solution 61
We can hear original sound and reflected sound separately only if there is a time interval of at



least 0.1 sec between them.
So, time taken to listen to echo = 0.1 s
Time taken for sound to reach the reflecting surface,

Solution 62
(a) The bouncing back of sound when it strikes a hard surface is called reflection of
sound.Hard, solid surfaces are the best for reflecting sound waves.
(b) Metal sheet, hard wood are good reflectors of sound.
(c) The laws of reflection of sound are:
1. The incident sound wave, the reflected sound wave, and the normal at the point of
incidence, all lie in the same plane.
2. The angle of reflection of sound is always equal to the angle of incidence of sound.
Solution 63
(a) The repetition of sound caused by the reflection of sound waves is called echo. An echo is
produced when sound is reflected from a hard surface such as a tall brick wall or a cliff.
(b) The minimum distance in air required from a sound reflecting surface to hear an echo (at
20oC) is 17.2 metrers
(c) Distance s = 825 m
speed of sound v = 330 m/s
Time taken for sound to reach the reflecting surface,

Solution 64
(a) Ultrasounds are the sounds having very high frequency which cannot be heard by human
beings.

(b)Applications of ultrasound are:
1. Ultrasound is used in industry for detecting flaws in metal blocks without damaging them
2. In hospitals, ultrasounds are used to investigate the internal organs of the human body such
as liver, kidneys, uterus, etc
3. Ultrasounds are also used to monitor the growth of fetus inside the mother’s uterus.
Solution 65
(a)Infrasonic waves include sounds of frequencies below 20 Hz. These sounds are produced



by objects vibrating very slowly. Whales and elephants can produce these sounds.
(b)Ultrasonic waves include sounds of frequencies above 20,000 Hz. These sounds are
produced by objects vibrating very rapidly. Bats and dolphins can produce these sounds.
(c)Speed of sound v = 344 m/s
Lower frequency fl= 20 Hz
Higher frequency fh = 20,000Hz

Solution 66
(a)
(a) Echolocation is the method used by some animals to locate the objects by hearing the
echoes of their ultrasonic squeaks.
(b) Echocardiography is the use of ultrasound waves to investigate the action of the heart.
(c) Ultrasonography is the technique of obtaining pictures of internal organs of the body by
using echoes of ultrasound pulses.
(b) Bat navigates and finds its food by echolocation.
(c) Porpoise produces ultrasonic waves.
Solution 67
(a) SONAR stands for SOund Navigation And Ranging. A sonar is an apparatus (or device)
which is used to find the depth of a sea or to locate the underwater things like shoals of fish,
shipwrecks and enemy submarines.
(b) Time taken to listen to the return signal = 3 s

Solution 68

Construction of human ear:
The ear consists of three compartments: outer ear, middle ear and inner ear. The outer ear
consists of broad part called pinna and about 2 to 3 centimeters long passage called ear
canal. At the end of ear canal is a thin, elastic, circular membrane called tympanum or ear-
drum. The middle ear contains three small delicate bones called hammer, anvil and stirrup.



These bones are linked to one another. The one end of hammer is touching the ear drum and
its other end is connected to the second bone called anvil. The other end of anvil is connected
to the third bone called stirrup. And the free end of stirrup is held against the membrane over
the oval window of the inner ear. The lower part of middle ear has Eustachian tube going to the
throat. The inner ear has a coiled structure called cochlea. The cochlea is filled with liquid
containing sound sensitive nerve cells. The other side of cochlea is connected to the auditory
nerve which goes to the brain.
Working of human ear:
The sound waves are collected by the pinna. These sound waves pass through ear canal and
fall on the ear-drum. Sound waves consist of compressions and rarefactions. When the
compression strikes the ear drum, the pressure on the outside of ear drum increases and
pushes the ear drum inwards. And when rarefaction strikes the ear drum, the pressure on the
outside of ear drum decreases and it moves outwards. Thus, when sound waves fall on the
ear drum, it vibrates back and forth rapidly. These vibrations are passed onto the three bones
in the middle ear and finally to the liquid in the cochlea. Due to this, liquid in the cochlea starts
to vibrate, setting up electrical impulses in the nerve cells present in it. These impulses are
carried to the brain by auditory nerve. The brain interprets the impulses and we get the
sensation of hearing.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:209

Solution 85
(a) Echo
(b) Sound gets reflected back
(c) Incident sound travels distance = 800 m
Sound after reflection travels = 800 m
Total distance travelled by sound = 800 + 800 = 1600 m
(d) Distance of cliff, d = 800 m
Time taken to listen to the echo = 5 s

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:210

Solution 86
(a) A and D
(b) B and D
(c) Same vibrating body produced all the sound wvaes
(d) Tuning forks
Solution 87
(a) The air in-between Anhad and the loudspeaker vibrates with the frequency of 200 Hz
(b) Anhad receives sound in the right ear by the sound waves coming directly from the
loudspeaker and in his left ear he receives sound from sound waves reflected from the



classroom wall.
Solution 88

Solution 89
a)
(i) X is ultrasonic sound
(ii) Y is infrasonic sound
(iii) Z is audible sound
(b) Ultrasound machine in hospitals
(c) Simple pendulum
(d) Loudspeaker
(e) 20 Hz to 20000 Hz
Solution 90
(a) The person would hear a lot of noise of heavy traffic in a city.
(b) The person would hear very little noise of traffic in a village.
(c) The person would hear echoes of persons talking in a bare room.
(d) The person will find furnished room less echoic.



Why Do We Fall Ill ?
PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page No – 300.

Solution SAQ – 1:
Healthy:
1. It is a state of complete physical, mental and social well being.
2. A healthy person will be disease free.

Disease Free:
1. It is a state of absence of discomfort or derangement in any part of body.
2. A disease free person can be healthy or unhealthy.

Solution SAQ – 2:
There are many types of health problems that can possibly arise after disaster such as victims of
disaster might suffer from lack of nourishment due to inadequate food.
The immediate health problems after disaster includes suffering of trapped people, people may
suffer from fractures, burns and asthma due to dust particles arising from buildings.
Contaminated water can also cause other health issues.

Solution SAQ – 3
The provisions made by local authorities was to allocate funds and guide investments,
encourage research, develop human resources through training and other capacity-building
efforts, promote water quality monitoring, provide guidelines for various programmes and
ensure the implementation of the water supply programmes.

Solution SAQ – 4
There are many provisions provided by local authorities for solid waste management. These are
followings:
(i) Sweeping
(ii) Collection
(iii) Vermi-composting
(iv) Recycling system
(v) Transportation system
(vi) Power generation and
(vii) Dumping

Solution SAQ – 5:
Symptoms:
1. They indicate the presence of disease.
2. Symptoms are a collective indication of a number of diseases in a particular part or organ.



Signs:
1. They provide information about the presence of particular disease.
2. They are distinct for different diseases.

Solution SAQ – 6:
Casual organisms of the following diseases:
(i) Tuberculosis – Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(ii) Kala-azar – Leishmania (protozoa)
(iii) Malaria – Plasmodium
(iv) Measles – Virus
(v) Athlete’s foot – Fungi
(vi) Cholera – Vibrio Cholerae

Solution SAQ – 7:
Two means of physical contacts by which AIDS does not spread are handshakes and hugs.

Solution SAQ – 8
A vector is a carrier (mosquito, tick) that takes the disease from an infected individual to an
uninfected individual. They do not have the disease themselves; they carry the infected agent
such as blood. A reservoir is anything (person, animal, arthropod, plant, soil or substance) in
which a disease lives and can multiply. The disease needs the reservoir in order to survive. A
vector must be living but a reservoir can be a living or a non living thing such as soil or water.
Vectors or carriers are not pathogenic but are simply transmitters.

Solution SAQ – 9
Organ Specific Manifestation- These are the diseases caused in the same organ or organ system
as the point of entry of the microbe. E.g. Tuberculosis which enters through the nose and
affects the lungs. (Both are organs of the respiratory system)
Tissue Specific Manifestation- These are the diseases caused in a different organ as the point of
entry. E.g. Japanese Encephalitis which enters through the blood but affects the brain.

Solution SAQ – 10
There are many possible areas, organs and tissues within our body where microbes may reside.
However the severity of disease symptoms depends on the number of microbes in the body.
For example, if the number of microbes is very small, then the symptoms of disease will be
minor or unnoticed. However, if the numbers are large, the disease can be severe enough to be
life-risking.

Solution SAQ – 11



Infection of HIV is found to have multiple dimensional effects. In case of HIV infection, the virus
goes to immune system and ultimately damages its function. Thus many symptoms of HIV –
AIDS infection are due to the fact that patients body no longer fight off many minor infections
that he/she faces everyday.

Solution SAQ – 12
There are two ways to treat an infectious disease. One is to reduce the effects of the disease
and the other way is to kill the cause of the disease.
For example, we can take the medicines that bring down the fever, reduce pain or loose
motions. We can take bed rest so that we can converse our energy. This exercise will enable us
to focus on the healing. However it will not make the pathogen to go away, so the disease will
not be cured. For that we have to kill the microbe.

Solution SAQ – 13
Prevention is better than cure as a disease always cause some damage to the body, loss of
working days, besides expenditure on medication. The important precautions for preventing
occurrence of diseases include (i) hygienic environment; (ii) personal hygiene; (iii) proper
nutrition; (iv) clean food; (v) clean water; (vi) regular exercise and (vii) adequate relaxation.
Everybody should also be aware of diseases and their mode of spreading (epidemic). A regular
medical checkup is also earnestly required to stay healthy.

Solution SAQ – 14
Vaccines help a body’s immune system prepare in advance to fight infectious illnesses and
potentially deadly diseases caused by infectious agents or their by-products. Vaccines work on
the principle of immunization. During vaccination, when the immune system first encounters an
infectious microbe, it responds against it and then remembers it specifically. So the next time
that particular microbe, or its close relatives enter the body, the immune system responds with
greater vigour. This eliminates the infection even more quickly than the first occurrence of the
disease.

Solution SAQ – 15
Three diseases caused by Bacteria are: Tuberculosis (T.B.), Cholera and Typhoid.
Three diseases caused by Virus are: – Influenza, Jaundice and AIDS.

Solution SAQ – 16
The diarrhoea spreads through infection by contaminated food, water, drinks, hands, clothes
etc. During diarrhoea frequent loose motions and vomiting leads to dehydration.
To control the dehydration during diarrhoea; Saline drip may be given intravenously to
maintain fluid and electrolytes in the body. Alternatively oral rehydration Solution (ORS) may be



given to the patient periodically.

Solution SAQ – 17
Stagnant water (of pools, ponds) in the locality is the habitat of larvae of many types of
mosquitoes and they are the vector of a disease, called malaria.
Doctor confirms malaria if the patients have following symptoms: headache, nausea, muscular
pain and high fever. Doctor also checks the presence of malarial parasite in the human body by
blood test.

Solution SAQ – 18
Methods of prevention of Malaria:
(i) Wire-gauze should be used on doors and windows of houses to prevent entry of mosquitoes.
(ii) One should sleep under mosquito nets.
(iii) Insect-repellents should be used to prevent mosquito-bite.
(iv) Mosquito larvae can be killed by sprinkling kerosene oil on large-sized water bodies.

Solution SAQ – 19
The person having AIDS lose the power of fighting any infection. The disease of AIDS is caused
by retrovirus (a RNA virus) known as Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).
AIDS disease spreads among human beings in the following ways:
(i) The AIDS usually spreads through unprotected sexual contacts with an infected person
carrying AIDS virus.
(ii) It also spreads through the transfusion of blood contaminated with an AIDS virus.
(iii) It also spreads through the use of infected needles for injections.
(iv) An AIDS infected mother can transmit the virus to her child during pregnancy or during
birth.

Solution SAQ – 20
Diarrhoea is an abnormally frequent discharge of semisolid or fluid faeces. It spreads through
infection by contaminated food, water, drinks, hands, clothes, bed sheets and utensils.

Symptoms of Diarrhoea:
(i) Decreased appetite, nausea, vomiting and abdominal cramps.
(ii) There may be blood and mucus in the stools.

Prevention:
(i) Eatables should be covered to prevent their contamination.
(ii) Fruits and vegetable should be properly washed before use.
(iii) Stale food should not be consumed.



Control:
(i) Complete bed rest should be ensured till the illness is fully controlled.
(ii) For treating diarrhoea anti-microbial drugs and anti-diarrhoea agents should be used.

Solution SAQ – 21
In rabies, the patient feels restless, does excessive salivation, has a choking feeling and finds
difficulty in the intake of even liquid food. Since patient develops fear of water, the disease is
called hydrophobia.

Solution SAQ – 22
Pulse Polio Programme – Pulse polio immunization programme forms the largest single day
public health project. Pulse means a dose of a substance (here polio vaccine) especially when
applied for a short period of time. It was conducted for the first time in 1995. The program uses
oral polio vaccine or OPV. As per the National Immunization Schedule (NIS), a dose of 3 drops is
given orally to the child, i.e. one dose each at 1.5, 2.5 and 3.5 month’s age. Finally a booster
dose is given at the age of 1.5 years. After oral administration, virus particles in the vaccine
begin to live in the intestine of the human body and multiply. It leads to production of
protective molecules in the intestine and the blood.

Solution LAQ – 1
Human beings live in societies. Our social environment therefore plays an important role in our
individual health. In villages, towns or cities, our physical environment is decided by our social
environment. For example – if there are heaps of garbage and trash littered here and there, or
if there is open drain water lying stagnant around where we live, the possibility of poor health
increases. So, public cleanliness is an important contribution to an individual’s health.
Some other community issues that influence health are:
Community issues like child marriage can affect the health of the girl the baby born to an
underage girl.
Lack of education of the community to sex related issues can also cause sexually transmitted
diseases.
Bad treatment with the underprivileged sections of the society can also cause mental problems.
Social equality and harmonious relationships among our population are necessary for the
individual health. Thus, we see that there is an overlap of personal and community issues for
health.

Solution LAQ – 2
Infectious diseases spread from one infected person to other normal person by various
methods.

(a) Air-borne diseases – For example: common cold, pneumonia and tuberculosis. Such disease
causing microbes are spread throughout the air. The transmission of these microbes occurs



through the little droplets coughed out by an infected person who sneezes or coughs. A person
in the vicinity of such a person can inhale these disease causing microbes and may become
infected.

(b)Water-borne diseases – For example: Cholera, Infectious diseases can also spread through
water. These occur when a stool from someone suffering from an infectious gut disease, such
as cholera or amoebiasis, gets mixed with the drinking water used by people living nearby. The
cholera-infested bacteria can enter new hosts through the water they drink and can cause
disease in them.

(c) Sexually-transmitted diseases – For example: Syphilis and AIDS. Both of these pathogens are
transmitted by sexual contact from one partner to the other. However, such sexually
transmitted diseases are not spread by casual physical contact.

(e) Formite borne diseases – Articles coming in contact with the patients act as sources of
infection. For example: door handles, taps, garments, utensils, crockery, etc.

(f) Spread of disease through vectors – Many animals which live with us may carry diseases.
These animals can transfer infecting agents from a sick person to another potential host. Thus,
these animals act as intermediaries or vectors. For example – female Anopheles mosquitos are
vectors of disease, malaria.

Solution LAQ – 3
General ways of preventing infection are:
Public hygiene is one basic key to the prevention of infectious diseases.
In the method of prevention of diseases, following practices are adopted:
(i) To avoid exposure to air-borne microbes, adopt living conditions that are not overcrowded.
(ii) To prevent exposure to water-borne microbes, safe drinking water should be provided.
(iii) To avoid vector-borne infections, we can provide clean environment as it would not allow
mosquito breeding.

Solution LAQ – 4
Principle of Treatment:
There are two ways to treat an infectious disease. One is to reduce the effects of the disease
and the other way is to kill the cause of the disease. For the first requirement, we can provide
treatments that will reduce the symptoms. The symptoms are usually a result of inflammation.
For example, we can take medicines that bring down fever, reduce pain or loose motions. We
can take bed rest so that we can converse our energy.
However such a kind of symptom-directed treatment by itself is inadequate. Since it will not
make the pathogen go away, so the disease will not be cured. For that we have to kill the
microbe itself.



Solution LAQ – 5

(a) AIDS – AIDS stands for Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome. It is a fatal disease. The
disease of AIDS is caused by retrovirus (a RNA virus) known as Human Immunodeficiency Virus
(HIV). AIDS virus attacks white blood cells (WBCs) or lymphocytes of human beings and
weakens the human body’s immunity or self-defence mechanism.
Some important symptoms of AIDS are: Swollen lymph nodes, regular fever, sweating at night
and weight loss. Its virus also cause severe damage to brain and may lead to loss of memory,
ability to speak and of clear thinking.

(b) Malaria – Malaria is caused by a protozoan parasite Plasmodium. This disease spreads
through the bite of an insect vector – the female Anopheles mosquito which feeds on human
blood. Male Anopheles mosquito feeds upon plant juice. Main symptoms of malaria include
headache, nausea, muscular pain and high fever. Malarial attack consists of three stages:
(i) Cold stage, feeling of extreme cold and shivers.
(ii) Hot stage, high fever, faster respiration and heart beat.
(iii) Sweating stage, due to profuse sweating, temperature of the body goes down to normal.

Solution LAQ – 6
Few diseases caused by bacteria are:
(i) Tuberculosis (T.B.) – T.B. is an infectious disease which is communicated from one person to
another directly or indirectly. It is caused by the bacterium called Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
T.B. can affect all parts of the body such as lungs, lymph glands, bones, intestine etc.
(ii) Cholera – Cholera is an acutely infectious, fatal disease and is more common during
overcrowded fairs, festivals and after floods. Cholera is caused by the bacterium Vibrio
Cholerae. It is transmitted by flies, contaminated water and food.
(iii) Typhoid – Typhoid is most common communicable disease in India. Typhoid fever is
common in humans of the age 1to 15 years age group. Typhoid is caused by a rod-shaped and
motile bacterium, called Salmonella typhi which is commonly found in the intestine of human
beings. Human infection is direct.
(iv) Diarrhoea – Diarrhoea is an abnormally frequent discharge of semisolid or fluid faeces. The
diarrhoea spreads through infection by contaminated food, water, drinks, hands, clothes, etc.
The causative agents of diarrhoea are mainly bacteria such as Escherichia coli, Clostridium
botulinum, Shigella dysentiriae, Campylobacter jejuri and Salmonella.

Solution LAQ – 7
Important viral diseases of human beings are:
(i) Influenza – Influenza is commonly called flu. It is caused by an influenza virus (Myxovirus
influenza). There exist three types of influenza viruses – A, B and C. A and B types of influenza
viruses are important because these are responsible for causing of disease epidemics



throughout the world. The inhaled virus attacks the epithelial cells in the mucous membrane of
nose, throat and upper respiratory tract. Influenza is spread mainly from person to person
contact and by droplet infection via sneezing, coughing and talking.

(ii) Jaundice – Jaundice or hepatitis is the disease of liver. Since liver is a very important organ in
the body, so its inflammation due to jaundice affects digestion adversely. Jaundice is caused by
viral infection. The types of hepatitis are: Hepatitis A, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, Hepatitis D,
Hepatitis E or Hepatitis G. Except for type B which is a DNA virus, all the other are RNA viruses.
Hepatitis is spread
mostly by food and water contaminated with hepatitis virus.

(iii) AIDS – AIDS stands for Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome. It is a fatal disease. The
disease of AIDS is caused by retrovirus (a RNA virus) known as Human Immunodeficiency Virus
(HIV). AIDS virus attacks white blood cells (WBCs) or lymphocytes of human beings and
weakens the human body’s immunity or self-defence mechanism. AIDS becomes prone to many
other infections or diseases.

(iv) Polio – Poliomyelitis or polio is a disease of the nervous system caused by one of the
smallest known virus, called polio virus. The virus enters the body through the food and water
and reaches the intestine and from there it enters the CNS or central nervous system via blood
stream and lymphatic systems. Children between the age of 6 months to 3 years are most
prone to polio infection. Polio is transmitted among children by the faeco-oral route and
through the direct contact, dirty hands, contaminated food or milk and flies.

Solution LAQ – 8

(a) Tuberculosis – T.B. is an infectious disease which is communicated from one person to
another directly or indirectly. It is caused by the bacterium called Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
T.B. can affect all parts of the body such as lungs, lymph glands, bones, intestine etc. The
incubation period of T.B. includes a few weeks to a few years.
The patient of tuberculosis feels sick and weak. There is a loss of appetite and weight. Typical
fever pattern and night sweats are also common.

(b) Polio – Poliomyelitis or polio is a disease of the nervous system caused by one of the
smallest known virus, called polio virus. The virus enters the body through the food and water
and reaches the intestine and from there it enters the CNS or central nervous system via blood
stream and lymphatic systems. Children between the age of 6 months to 3 years are most
prone to polio infection. Polio is transmitted among children by the faeco-oral route and
through the direct contact, dirty hands, contaminated food or milk and flies.
The early symptoms of the polio disease are sore throat and headache.



Natural Resources
PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page No – 356.

Solution SAQ – 1
Air is composed of a mixture of gases such as nitrogen, oxygen and carbon dioxide. It also
contains water vapours and suspended dust particles.

Solution SAQ – 2
Oxygen is required by all living beings for respiration and for burning materials. This is balanced
by green plants. Green plants take in carbon dioxide and release oxygen during the process of
photosynthesis.

Solution SAQ – 3
The atmosphere keeps the average temperature of the earth fairly steady during the day as the
atmosphere prevents the sudden increase in temperature during the daylight hours and at
night atmosphere slows down the escape of heat into the outer space.

Solution SAQ – 4
The movement of air from one region to another creates winds. When the solar radiations fall
on the earth, some are absorbed and majority of these are reflected back by the land and water
bodies. These reflected solar radiations heat up the atmosphere from below. As a result
convection currents are set up in the air but since land gets heated faster than the water, the
air above the land gets heated faster than the air over water bodies. During the day the air
above the land gets heated and starts rising, creating a region of low pressure below. As a result
the air over the sea moves into this region of low pressure and forms the wind.

Solution SAQ – 5
(i) Take a beaker full of water, a beaker full of soil and a closed bottle containing a
thermometer.
(ii) Keep them in bright sunlight for three hours.
(iii) Now, measure the temperature of all three vessels and also take the temperature reading
in shade at the same time.
(iv) You will observe that the temperature of the soil and sand is more than that of water in
bright sunlight because sand and soil gets heated by solar radiations faster than the water.
(v) Therefore, land would become hot faster than the sea.
(vi) You will also observe that the temperature of air in shade is different from the temperature
of soil, sand and water in bright sunlight because of the direct effect of radiations.

Solution SAQ – 6



When the solar radiations fall on the earth, some are absorbed and majority of these are
reflected back or re-radiated by the land and water bodies. These reflected or re-radiated solar
radiations heat the atmosphere from below. As a result convection currents are set up in the
air.

Solution SAQ – 7
The factors that influence the movement of air are:
(i) Uneven heating of land at different parts of the earth.
(ii) Differences in heating and cooling of land and water bodies.
(iii) Vapourisation and condensation of water vapours.
(iv) Rotation of earth.
(v) Presence of high mountain ranges in the paths of wind.
(vi) Difference in topography over which the wind passes.

Solution SAQ – 8
When the water bodies get heated by solar radiations during the day, a large amount of water
evaporates and goes in the air. The air carrying water vapours also gets heated. This hot air
rises up carrying water vapours with it. As the air rises, it expands and cools. This cooling causes
the water vapour in the air to condense as tiny droplets which slowly grow bigger by the
condensation of more water droplets and forms clouds. When the droplets have grown big and
heavy, they fall down in the form of rain.

Solution SAQ – 9
(i) Take an empty plastic bottle.
(ii) Pour 5-10 ml water into it and close the bottle tightly with a cap.
(iii) Shake the bottle well and then place it in the sun for 10 minutes.
(iv) Now, open the cap of the bottle and allow some smoke from the lighted incense stick to
enter the bottle.
(v) Quickly close the bottle tightly with the cap.
(vi) Press the bottle hard between your hands as much as possible.
(vii) After few seconds release the bottle. Press the bottle again as hard as you can.
This simple experiment replicates, on a very small scale, the happenings when air with a very
high content of water vapour goes from a region of high pressure to a region of low pressure.
When bottle containing water is kept in the sun, the water evaporates and air inside the bottle
gets saturated with water vapour. When the bottle is pressed between your hands, the
pressure inside becomes high and air inside the bottle moves in a region of low pressure. It
expands and cools. The smoke particles act as ‘nuclei’ on which water vapours condense in the
form of tiny droplets. When you release the pressure, the air inside the bottle becomes foggy.
When bottle is again pressed, the fog will disappear. It is so because due to high pressure
condensed water vapours will fall down and collect as water at the bottom of the bottle. When
the experiment is repeated without smoke inside the bottle, one will not observe foggy air



inside the bottle as smoke particles are absent and nothing is available in air to act as ‘nucleus’
for water vapours to condense as tiny droplets.

Solution SAQ – 10
The major components of air pollution are soot, fly ash, dust particles, smoke and some gases
like sulphur dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxide, ammonia etc.

Solution SAQ – 11
When fossil fuels such as coal and petroleum products are burnt, they produce oxides of
nitrogen and sulphur. On dissolving in rain these oxides form nitric acid and sulphuric acid
respectively. This causes acid rain. These acids wash down into the soil and make it highly
acidic, thus, affecting the growth of plants and ultimately the forest growth. It also affects the
surface of buildings by eroding the stone and brick works.

Solution SAQ – 12
Smog is a photochemical haze caused by the action of solar ultra violet radiation on
atmosphere polluted with primary pollutants such as hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen from
automobile exhaust. It reduces visibility and is highly suffocating and toxic to humans, animals
and plants.

Solution SAQ – 13
Effects of air pollution on human beings:
(i) Suspended particulate matter causes asthma, bronchitis and allergic cold.
(ii) Pollutant gases cause irritation in eyes, throat and lungs. Heart related diseases tend to
increase.
(iii) Hydrocarbon vapours not only damage the internal organs but also cause cancer.

Solution SAQ – 14
In coastal areas, during daytime, there is a regular flow of cool air from the sea towards the
land. At night, there is a reverse flow of air from land to sea. This happens because during the
daytime, land gets heated faster than water.

Solution SAQ – 15
The atmosphere keeps the average temperature of the earth fairly steady during the day as the
atmosphere prevents the sudden increase in temperature during the daylight hours and at
night atmosphere slows down the escape of heat into the outer space.

Solution SAQ – 16
Atmosphere is divided into five distinct layers: Troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere,
thermosphere and exosphere.
i. Troposphere is the lowest region of atmosphere which contains air and is subject of



differential heating. It extends from the surface of the earth upto 8-20 kms. Many important
climatic events such as cloud formation, lightning, thundering etc all takes place in the
troposphere.
ii. The Stratosphere extends from the top of the troposphere up to around 31 miles (50 km)
above the Earth’s surface. In this region the temperature increases with height. Heat is
produced due to the formation of ozone.
iii. The mesosphere extends from the top of the stratosphere to about 53 miles (85 km) above
the earth. The gases, including the oxygen molecules, continue to become thinner and thinner
with height.
iv. Above the mesosphere the thermosphere extends up to near 375 miles (600 km) above the
earth. This layer is known as the upper atmosphere. As such, incoming high energy ultraviolet
and x-ray radiation from the sun, absorbed by the molecules in this layer, causes a large
temperature increase.
v. Exosphere exists above the thermosphere.

Solution SAQ – 17
Air pollution is of two main types:
Natural: It is the pollution caused by nature. It includes forest fires, dust storms, pollen etc.
Human made: It is the pollution caused by human activities. It includes burning of fossil fuels in
industries, vehicles and thermoelectric plants, gaseous emission from industries, mining,
processing and stone crushing.

Solution SAQ – 18
When the water bodies get heated by solar radiations during the day, a large amount of water
evaporates and goes in the air. The air carrying water vapours also gets heated. This hot air
rises up carrying water vapours with it. As the air rises it expands and cools. This cooling causes
the water vapours in the air to condense as tiny droplets which slowly grow bigger by the
condensation of more water droplets and forms clouds.

Solution SAQ – 19
Global warming: An increase in the carbon dioxide content in the atmosphere leads to global
warming. The global warming is quite dangerous as it tends to melt polar ice and glaciers
existing on mountains, rise in the water level of the oceans and submerge several coastal areas
and islands. This could further lead to floods.

Solution SAQ – 20
Ozone depletion is caused by certain chemicals called ozone depleting substances. They include
chlorofluoro carbons, methyl bromide, nitrogen oxides and chlorine.
Effects of ozone depletion:
(i) Skin cancer.
(ii) Damage of eyes.



(iii) Damage of immune system.
(iv) Decreased crop yields.

Solution SAQ – 21
When fossil fuels such as coal and petroleum products are burnt, they produce oxides of
nitrogen and sulphur. On dissolving in rain these oxides form nitric acid and sulphuric acid
respectively. This causes acid rain. These acids wash down into the soil and make it highly
acidic, thus, affecting the growth of plants and ultimately the forest growth. It also affects the
surface of buildings by eroding the stone and brick works.

Solution SAQ – 22
Rainwater harvesting is a technique used to capture and store rain water by making special
water harvesting structures so that there is an increase in the recharge of underground water
resources.

Solution SAQ – 23
Climate is the average weather of an area. It represents the general pattern of atmospheric or
weather conditions, seasonal variations and weather extremes, in a region over an extended
period, say 50 years or 100 years. For example, desert areas have a hot climate whereas
snowbound mountains have a cold climate.

Solution SAQ – 24
The short term changes in the properties of the troposphere forms the weather. The weather
changes take place everyday. It tells us about the temperature, rain, cloud and sunshine of an
area.

Solution SAQ – 25
CFC’s are chlorofluoro carbons which deplete the ozone layer. They are rich in chlorine, fluorine
and carbon.
Effects of chlorofluoro carbons:
(i) Skin cancer.
(ii) Damage of eyes.
(iii) Damage of immune system.
(iv) Decreased crop yields.

Solution SAQ – 26
Break down of bigger rocks into smaller mineral particles is called weathering. It is of 3 types:
(i) Physical weathering: Various climatic factors such as temperature, wind, rain water, ice,
snow, glaciers and running water contribute to physical weathering. Water and high
temperature cause corrosive humidity and bring about unequal expansion and contraction of
rocks, facilitating their break down.



(ii) Chemical weathering: It involves a variety of chemical processes, such as hydrolysis,
hydration, oxidation and reduction. The breakdown of complex compounds by the carbonic
acids present in water and acidic substances derived from the decomposition of organic matter
in soil, are examples of chemical weathering.
(iii) Biological weathering: Is done by living organisms such as lichens and bryophytes. They
create small crevices which deepen to form cracks in the rocks. Cracks gradually widen and
cause slow fragmentation and eventually pulverisation of rocks.

Solution SAQ – 27
The removal and transportation of the top layer of soil from its original position to another
place, under the effect of strong winds and fast running rainwater is called soil erosion. Soil
erosion can be prevented by :
(i) Intensive cropping
(ii) Sowing grasses and planting xerophytes.
(iii) Terrace farming.
(iv) Contour bunding.

Solution SAQ – 28
Biological weathering: Is done by living organisms such as lichens and bryophytes. Lichens
growing on rock surface extract minerals from the rocks. This creates small crevices at places
where a thin layer of soil builds up. Mosses grow over these crevices causing deepening of
crevices and results in the buildup of more soil inside them. The roots of short lived herbs also
passes into them and the cracks gradually widen and cause slow fragmentation and eventually
pulverisation of rocks.

Solution SAQ – 29
Water is replenished in the seas by the means of water or hydrological cycle. We know that the
oceans or seas are the largest global reservoir of water. Water evaporates from these reservoirs
in large quantities and helps in the formation of clouds. The winds blows the clouds over to the
lands where after getting cooled enough, the water in clouds falls on the earth or directly over
the seas as rain and hail. Some water from rain and melting snow soaks into the ground, but
most of it flows in rivers and returns directly to the seas.

Solution SAQ – 30
Nitrogen fixation is the process of fixing free nitrogen into compounds. This takes place by the
following means:
(a) Certain blue-green algae and bacteria can fix atmospheric nitrogen.
(b) Nitrogen fixing bacteria found in the nodules of roots of legumes such as gram, bean, pulses
etc. fix atmospheric nitrogen into nitrogen containing compounds.
(c) Lightning also helps in the formation of nitrogen containing compounds.



Solution SAQ – 31
Nitrogen exists as free nitrogen in the atmosphere. This free nitrogen is fixed into compounds
of ammonia and nitrates. Most of the organisms cannot utilise nitrogen as molecular nitrogen.
Plants take compounds containing nitrogen from the soil. From plants nitrogen passes into the
food web. Decay of dead plants, animals and excreta causes return of nitrogen compounds to
the soil. Denitrifying bacteria cause liberation of free nitrogen in the atmosphere.

Solution SAQ – 32
Carbon is an important constituent of organic compounds found in all living beings in the form
of carbohydrates, fats, proteins and nucleic acids. Carbon is trapped in the surrounding air and
water in the form of carbon dioxide. The consumers devour the organic carbon compounds that
producers manufacture. Through respiration, both consumers and producers return carbon to
the non-living environment in the form of carbon dioxide. Some carbon accumulates in wood
for many years and is eventually returned to the atmosphere by fires or through consumption
and respiration by fungi, bacteria and other detrivores. Volcanic eruption also releases carbon
dioxide to the atmosphere.

Solution SAQ – 33
The dangers of global warming are:
(i) It leads to the melting of polar ice caps and rise in sea level.
(ii) Increase in the temperature of the earth due to green house effect will cause a change in
weather and precipitation patterns on the earth.
(iii) It leads to methane burp which is caused by the melting of methane hydrates in permafrost
and on sea floor.

Solution SAQ – 34
Carbon dioxide concentration in atmosphere is rising primarily because of two reasons: (i)
Deforestation and (ii) Increased combustion of fossil fuels.
As trees take in carbon dioxide from air and release oxygen back into the air, it helps in
maintaining the desired levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. But due to
deforestation, trees are being cut down and this is leading to the increase in carbon dioxide
levels.
The increased combustion of fossil fuels also leads to the release of enormous amounts of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.

Solution SAQ – 35
Ozone layer is called ozone umbrella/shield because it filters out the harmful, high energy ultra
violet radiations coming from the sun.

Solution SAQ – 36
In 1985, Farmen found that ozone layer had thinned out over Antarctica. It was called an ozone



hole.
Effects of widening of ozone hole are:
(i) Skin cancer.
(ii) Damage of eyes.
(iii) Damage of immune system.
(iv) Decreased crop yields.

Solution SAQ – 37
Water is one of the most important physical components which is essential for the survival of
live on earth. Ocean is the biggest storehouse of water. Water on evaporation forms clouds and
which after condensation falls down as rain. After rain, it passes through rivers and gets
collected again in the ocean. The circulation of water in this manner is called water cycle. The
cycle is also performed through living beings in the processes like absorption and transpiration
of water by plants and drinking by animals. Animals lose water during respiration and
evaporation, perspiration and excretion.

Solution SAQ – 38
(i) Nitrogen cycle

(ii) Carbon cycle



PS Verma and V.K. Agarwal Biology Class 9 Page No – 357.

Solution SAQ – 39
The bacteria which help in nitrogen fixation are Azotobactor and Rhizobium. Some bacteria
help to convert ammonia into nitrates. These are Nitrosomonas and Nitrobactor.

Solution SAQ – 40:



Solution SAQ – 41:



Solution SAQ – 42
The three aspects of nutrient cycling are:
(i) Input of nutrients – An ecosystem receives the nutrients from an external source. It stores
them for further use through biological processes.
(ii) Output of nutrients – Nutrients move out of an ecosystem and many of them become input
to another ecosystem.
(iii) Internal nutrient cycling – Nutrients are continuously regenerated and stored in soil in
forms available to plants. This is done by decomposers by the process of decomposition of
detritus.

Solution SAQ – 43
The organisms get water from and return it to the global water cycle. Plants absorb water from
the soil or water reservoir and add it to the air in vapour form by a process called transpiration.
Water transpired by trees cools the surrounding air. Animals take water from the water
reservoir or with food and return it to the air and vapours by respiration or to the soil by
excretion. Mammals also excrete water as sweat which evaporates from the water bodies.
Water is added to the environment by the death and decay of organisms. Water vapour formed
by transpiration and respiration form clouds and enters global water cycle. Rain adds water to
the soil and reservoir for reuse by plants and animals. This completes the water cycle.

Solution LAQ – 1:

Natural resources are living and non-living components of nature which are used by humans to
meet their requirements. Since natural resources are available only from the Earth, they are
called Earth resources.



Based on their abundance, natural resources are of two main types, inexhaustible and
exhaustible.

(a) Inexhaustible natural resources: They are natural resources which occur in such abundance
that they are not likely to get exhausted despite continuous use, e.g., air, water, solar energy.

(b) Exhaustible natural resources: They are natural resources which are available in limited
quantity. They may to get depleted by continuous and indiscriminate human consumption.
Exhaustible resources are of two kinds, renewable and non-renewable.

(i) Renewable resources: They are exhaustible resources which get replenished regularly. These
are both living and non-living resources which can replenish themselves by quick recycling, e.g.,
forests, wildlife, soil and underground water. Renewable resources can last for ever if they are
used responsibly.

(ii) Non-renewable resources: They are exhaustible resources which once used cannot be
replenished. Thus, these resources are non-living and cannot replenish themselves by recycling
and replacement. If not used carefully they will ultimately get exhausted. Their increased
consumption results in quicker exhaustion, e.g., minerals, fossil fuels such as coal and
petroleum.

Solution LAQ – 2
Air contains oxygen. The latter is needed by most organisms and plants for all respiration to go
on. It is therefore rightly called the breath of life. Air is an inexhaustible natural resource. In a
world without air, there would be no plant or animal life, no winds, clouds or rain, no fires and
no protection against harmful solar radiations. This is because the atmosphere covers the Earth,
like a blanket. Air is a bad conductor of heat. The atmosphere keeps the average temperature
of the Earth fairly steady during the day and even during the course of whole year. The
atmosphere prevents the sudden increase in temperature during the daylight hours. And at
night, atmosphere slows down the escape of heat into outer space.

Solution LAQ – 3
The introduction of chemicals, particulate matter, or biological materials into the atmosphere
that cause harm or irritate living organisms or damage the natural environment is known as air
pollution.
The major causes of air pollution can be in the form of solid particles, liquid droplets, or gas.
There are many different chemical substances that contribute to air pollution. These chemicals
come from a variety of sources. Among the many types of air pollutants are nitrogen oxides,
carbon monoxides, and organic compounds that can evaporate and enter the atmosphere.
Air pollutants have sources that are both natural and human. Humans contribute substantially
more to the air pollution problem. Forest fires, volcanic eruptions, wind erosion, pollen



dispersal, evaporation of organic compounds, and natural radioactivity are all among the
natural causes of air pollution. Though some pollution comes from these natural sources, most
pollution is the result of human activity. The biggest causes are the operation of fossil fuel-
burning, power plants and automobiles that combust fuel.
Effects of air pollution on human beings:
(i) SPM (suspeneded particulate matter) causes asthma, bronchitis and allergic cold.
(ii) Pollutant gases cause irritation in eyes, throat and lungs. Heart related diseases tend to
increase.
(iii) Hydrocarbon vapours not only damage the internal organs but also cause cancer.

Solution LAQ – 4
The ozone layer is a deep layer in the stratosphere, encircling the Earth, which has large
amounts of ozone in it. This layer shields the entire Earth from much of the harmful ultraviolet
radiation that comes from the sun. Ozone is a special form of oxygen, made up of three oxygen
atoms rather than the usual two oxygen atoms.
It is formed when some type of radiation or electrical discharge separates the two atoms in an
oxygen molecule (O2), which can then individually recombine with other oxygen molecules to
form ozone (O3).
Reduction in the concentration of ozone layer is called ozone depletion. Ozone depletion is
caused by certain chemicals called ozone depleting substances. They include chlorofluoro
carbons, methyl bromide, nitrogen oxides and chlorine.
Effects of ozone depletion: Depleting ozone layer allows more ultraviolet (UV) radiations to
pass through it, which reach the earth’s surface. These UV rays cause various harmful effects on
human beings, animals, plants and environment such as:
(i) Skin cancer.
(ii) Damage of eyes.
(iii) Damage of immune system.
(iv) Decreased crop yields.

Solution LAQ – 5

Sources of water pollution:
(i) Sewage – Organic wastes are contributed as domestic and commercial sewage by food
processing plants, dairy farms, piggeries, poultry farms, slaughter houses, breweries, tanneries,
etc. Animal excreta is discharged into fields or dumped into pits reaches water bodies through
run off and leaching, particularly during the rainy season.
(ii) Industrial wastes – Effluents of mills and industries such as paper mills, petroleum refineries,
etc., contain large quantities of harmful chemicals including acids, alkalis and heavy metals
(e.g., mercury salts from paper industries) that are discharged into water bodies (rivers and
lakes).
(iii) Synthetic soaps and detergents – Water containing soaps and detergents is discharged from



houses and certain factories.
(iv) Fertilizers and pesticides – Fertilizers and pesticides are being used excessively in the fields
to increase crop production. These are washed by rainwater into water bodies and pollute
them.
(v) Petroleum oil – Drilling and shipping operations are common in the oceans. Leakage of
petroleum oil during such operations or due to accidents results in water pollution.
(vi) Solid particles – Rain erodes soil and carries silt to water. Tiny suspended particles of clay
and dust also settle in water from air. These soil particles cause turbidity.
(vii) Thermal pollution – Discharge of hot water from industries and thermal plants into water
body changes the normal temperature of the water. The content of oxygen decreases. Reduced
oxygen content kills aquatic animals and reduces the rate of decomposition of organic matter
which, therefore, accumulates.

Harmful effects of Water pollution:
(i) Human diseases – Diseases such as typhoid, cholera, dysentery, jaundice and hepatitis are
caused due to water pollution.
(ii) Disturbance in ecological balance – All types of water pollutants affect the life forms living in
the water. These pollutants can encourage the growth of some life forms and harm some other
life forms hence affecting the balance between various organisms.
(iii) Removal of desirable substances from water bodies – With increase in the amount of
organic wastes in water, bacteria multiply rapidly and use up the available oxygen. Lack of
oxygen kills the fish and other animals.

Solution LAQ – 6
(i) Eutrophication is nutrient enrichment (i.e., addition of nitrates and phosphates) of water
body that results in the growth of aquatic plants, especially algae causing colouration of water
known as algal bloom. It leads to depletion of dissolved oxygen in water resulting in killing of
aquatic organisms (e.g., fish).
(ii) The phenomenon of increase in the concentration of harmful non-biodegradable substances
in the body of living organisms at each trophic level of the food chain is called biomagnification.
Two heavy metals which are biomagnified are mercury and cadmium. Due to biomagnification
fish-eating predatory birds such as kingfishers and loon become poisoned.

Solution LAQ – 7
Living organisms need water because it plays a vital role in the reactions taking place within
organism’s cells and body. Water acts as a universal solvent, providing a medium for the
chemical reactions to occur. Substances are also transported from one part of body to the other
in the dissolved state. Therefore, it is necessary for the organisms to maintain a distinct level of
water within their bodies in order to stay alive. Terrestrial life forms require fresh water
because their bodies cannot tolerate or get rid of the high amounts of the dissolved salts in
saline water. So, water sources need to be easily accessible to animals and plants to survive on



land.
Thus, availability of water decides not only the number of individuals of each species that are
able to survive in a particular area, but it also decides the diversity of life there.

Solution LAQ – 8
Soil is a mixture of small particles of rocks and humus (i.e., organic matter obtained from
decaying of living organisms or their wastes). Temperature variations due to radiations of the
sun, rain water, winds and living organisms influence the formation of soil from the rocks
involving two processes: weathering and paedogenesis.
Breakdown of bigger rocks into small, fine soil particles is called weathering. It may occur due to
physical, chemical or biological means. Under the influence of solar radiations, rocks heat up
and expand. At night, these rocks cool down and contract. Since all the parts of rocks do not
expand and contract at the same rate, cracks appear in the rocks and ultimately the large rocks
breakdown into smaller pieces. Flow of water through or over the rocks makes the cracks
bigger. Flowing/falling water also has an erasing effect on the rocks. On freezing the water
expands in rock crevices and breaks the rocks. Similarly, strong winds continue to rub against
hard rocks and erode them. Growth of lichens, mosses and other plants also influence the
formation of soil by eroding the rocks over which they are growing.

Paedogenesis: This process concludes the decomposition by bacteria and fungi, during which
organic materials are broken down, leading to humification and mineralization. Detritivores
such as nematods, earthworms, etc., consume organic matter and add excretory nitrogen to it.
Thus, addition of organic matter (humus) from dead and decomposed plants and animals, is the
final stage in soil formation.

Solution LAQ – 9
Soil pollution is caused by solid wastes and chemicals. The slag heaps from mines spoil the
beauty of sites of mines. Pulp and paper mills, sugar mills, oil refineries, power plants,
chemicals fertilizer manufacturing units, iron and steel plants, plastic and rubber producing
complexes are some major contributions to soil pollution. Most industrial furnaces and thermal
power stations produce fly ash, which is a grey, powdery residue of unburnt material, and
causes pollution. This fly ash hampers the growth of crop plants and also decreases crops of
orchards. Domestic waste also adds a large amount of solid wastes. Modern farming practices
involve the use of large amounts of fertilizers and pesticides. Use of these substances over long
period of time can destroy the soil structure by killing the soil microorganisms that recycle
nutrients in the soil. It also kills the earthworms which are helpful in making the rich humus.
Fertile soils can quickly become barren if sustainable practices are not followed.

Solution LAQ – 10
The removal and transportation of top soil from its original position to another place with the
help of certain agents such as strong winds and fast running waters, is called soil erosion.



Causes of Soil Erosion:
1. Strong winds: The soil which is uncovered and loose, is eroded, when it is exposed to strong
winds. The winds carry away the fine soil particles to other places.
2. Heavy rains: When rain falls on the unprotected top soil, rain water washes it down into the
streams and rivers, etc.
3. Human actions: Human activities such as expansion of urban areas has led to removal of
vegetation from certain regions. The bare land is thus exposed to agencies (winds, rains) of soil
erosion.

Effects of Soil Erosion:
1. Loss of fertility and desertification: Soil erosion results in the displacement of the top soil
from one region to another, thus, reducing its fertility. When the top fertile soil is constantly
removed from a region, only infertile sub-soil is left behind. In such a soil, only sparse
vegetation can grow. This way, soil erosion gradually turns lush green areas into deserts.
2. Landslides in hilly areas: Barren hills or hills with sparse vegetation are constantly exposed to
heavy rain fall that makes the top soils of hills loose. Due to soil erosion, rock pieces of various
sizes and loose soil from hills, suddenly slide down the steep slopes of mountains/hills. This
phenomenon is called landslides. When these rock pieces and soil block the narrow river bed
they result in floods. Sometimes, landslides block the roads and disrupt hill-life.
3. Flash floods: Vegetation in the hilly regions absorb a lot of rain water and keep the top soil
intact. Barren hills or hills with sparse vegetation cannot absorb much rain water and thus can
not keep the soil intact. So, heavy rains result in rapid movement of water in the areas resulting
in flash floods in lower areas causing enormous loss to life and property.

Prevention of soil erosion:
1. Intensive cropping: If the fields remain covered with crops throughout the year, their top soil
will not be exposed to winds or rains. In such a condition, no soil erosion will occur.
2. Sowing grasses and planting xerophytes: Soil should not be left uncovered. Sowing grasses on
barren soil or planting of xerophytes will bind the loose soil. The roots of grasses and
xerophytes hold the soil in place. Vegetative cover on the ground also helps in percolating
water into deeper layers of soil.
3. Terrace farming (terracing): In terracing the slopes are divided into a number of flat fields to
slow down the flow of water. In hilly regions, small crop fields are thus formed in the form of
steps on terraces for cultivation of crops. Such terrace farms reduced the flow of rain water
down the slopes of hills. Moreover, eroded soil from upper regions of hills gets deposited in
lower terraces.

Solution LAQ – 11
The continuous process by which nitrogen is exchanged between organisms and the
environment is called nitrogen cycle. Nitrogen is an essential nutrient, needed to make amino



acids and other important organic compounds, but most organisms cannot use free nitrogen,
which is abundant as a gas in the atmosphere.

Nitrogen cycle involves the following steps:
(i) Nitrogen fixation: This process involves the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into nitrates,
which are soluble in water. This is done by various nitrogen fixing bacteria. Example –
Rhizobium, blue green algae and bacterium Azotobacter.
(ii) Ammonification: It is the process of decomposing complex, dead organic matter into
ammonia. This is done by microorganisms living in the soil.
(iii) Nitrification: It is the process of conversion of ammonia into nitrites and then into nitrates.
This is done by nitrifying bacteria. Example – Nitrosomonas and Nitrobacter.
(iv) Denitrification: It is the process of reducing nitrates present in the soil to release nitrogen
back into the atmosphere. Example – Pseudomonas.
The decomposers help in decomposing the dead bodies of plants and animals, and hence act as
cleansing agents of environment. The decomposers also help in putting back the various
elements of which the dead plants and animals were made, back into the soil, air and water for
reuse by the producers like crop-plants, e.g. the decomposers like purifying bacteria and fungi
decompose the dead plants and animal bodies into ammonia. This ammonia is converted into
nitrates by nitrifying bacteria present in soil. These nitrates act as fertilizer in the soil and are
again absorbed by the plants for their growth. Thus, the nitrates act as fertilizer in the
biosphere so that the process of life may go on and on like an unending chain.