Chemical Reactions And
Equations

Question 1:
Why is respiration considered an exothermic process ?
Solution :
Respiration is an exothermic process because energy is produced during this process.

Question 2:
On what basis is a chemical equation balanced ?
Solution :
A balanced chemical equation has equal number of atoms of different elements in the
reactants and
products.

Question 3:
What happens chemically when quicklime is added to water filled in a bucket ?
Solution :
When quicklime is added to water, it forms slaked lime along with evolution of heat. There will
be a rise in temperature of the bucket.

Question 4:
Why should magnesium ribbon be cleaned before burning in air ?
Solution :
Magnesium ribbon
should be cleaned before burning in air to remove the protective layer of
basic magnesium carbonate from its surface.

Question 5:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
A chemical equation can be balanced easily by altering the formula of a reactant or product.
Solution :

False.

Question 6:
What is wrong with the following chemical equation ?
Mg + O ——— > MgO
Correct and balance it.
Solution :
Oxygen should be in molecular form, O2 
2Mg + O2 —–> 2MgO



Question 7:
What does the symbol (aq) represent in a chemical equation ?
Solution :
The symbol (aq)
represents aqueous solution in a chemical equation.

Question 8:
Why is photosynthesis considered an endothermic reaction ?
Solution :
Photosynthesis is an
endothermic reaction because sunlight energy is absorbed by green plants
during this process.

Question 9:
How will you indicate the following effects in a chemical equation ?
(a) A solution made in water
(b) Exothermic reaction
(c) Endothermic reaction
Solution :
(a) Aqueous solution is indicated by the symbol ‘aq’.
An exothermic reaction is indicated by writing “+Heat” or “+Heat energy”  or “+Energy” on the
products side of an equation.
An endothermic reaction is indicated by writing “+Heat” or “+Heat energy”  or “+Energy” on the
reactants side of an equation.

Question 10:
Translate the following statements into chemical equations and then balance the equations :
(a) Hydrogen sulphide gas burns in air to give water and sulphur dioxide.
(b) Phosphorus burns in oxygen to give phosphorus pentoxide.
(c) Carbon disulphide burns in air to give carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide.
(d) Aluminium metal replaces iron from ferric oxide, Fe O , giving aluminium oxide and iron.
(e) Barium chloride reacts with zinc sulphate to give zinc chloride and barium sulphate.
Solution :
(a) 2H2S + 3O2 —–> 2H2O + 2SO2
(b) P4 + 5O2 —–> 2P2O5
(c) CS2 + 3O2 —–> CO2 + 2SO2
(d) 2Al + Fe2O3 —–> Al2O3 + 2Fe
(e) BaCl2 + ZnSO4 —–> ZnCl2 + BaSO4

Question 11: 2 3

Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions :
(a) Calcium hydroxide + Carbon dioxide ——– > Calcium carbonate + Water



(b) Aluminium + Copper chloride ——– > Aluminium chloride + Copper
Solution :
(a) Ca(OH)2 + CO2 —–> CaCO3 + H2O
2Al + 3CuCl2 —–> 2AlCl3 + 3Cu

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:19

Question 12:
Complete and balance the following equations :
(a) NaOH + ………… —–> Na2S04 + H20
(b) Ca(OH)2 + ……….—–> CaC03 + H20
Solution :
(a) 2NaOH + H2SO4 —–> Na2SO4 + 2H2O
(b) Ca(OH)2 + CO2 —–> CaCO3 + H2O

Question 13:
Correct and balance the following equations :

1. Ca + H20 — > CaOH + H
2. N + H — > NH3

Solution :

1. Ca + 2H2O —–> Ca(OH)2 + H2
2. N2 + 3H2 —–> 2NH3

Question 14:
Write complete balanced equations for the following reactions :
(a) Calcium (solid) + Water (liquid) —–> Calcium hydroxide (solution) + Hydrogen (gas)
(b) Sulphur dioxide (gas) + Oxygen (gas) —–> Sulphur trioxide (gas)
Solution :
(a) Ca (s) + 2H2O(l) —–> Ca(OH)2(aq) + H2 (g)
(b) 2SO2(g) + O2 (g) —–> 2SO3(g)

Question 15:

1. Na + O2 —–> Na2O
2. H2O2 —–> H2O + O2
3. Mg(OH)2+ HCl —–> MgCl2 + H2O.
4. Fe + O2 —–> Fe2O3
5. Al(OH)3 —–> Al2O3 + H2O
6. NH3+ CuO —–> Cu + N2 + H2O
7. Al2(SO4)3+ NaOH —–> Al(OH)3 + Na2SO4
8. HNO3+ Ca(OH)2 —–> Ca(NO3)2 + H2O
9. NaOH + H2SO4 —–> Na2SO4 + H2O

10. BaCl2+ H2SO4 —–> BaSO4 + HCl

Solution :

1. 4Na + O2 —–> 2Na2O
2. 2H2O2 —–> 2H2O + O2
3. Mg(OH)2+ 2HCl —–> MgCl2 + 2H2O.



4. 4Fe + 3O2 —–> 2Fe2O3
5. 2Al(OH)3 —–> Al2O3 + 3H2O
6. 2NH3+ 3CuO —–> 3Cu + N2 + 3H2O
7. Al2(SO4)3+ 6NaOH —–> 2Al(OH)3 + 3Na2SO4
8. 2HNO3+ Ca(OH)2 —–> Ca(NO3)2 + 2H2O
9. 2NaOH + H2SO4 —–> Na2SO4 + 2H2O

10. BaCl2+ H2SO4 —–> BaSO4 + 2HCl

Question 16:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Chemical equations are balanced to satisfy the law of…….
(b) A solution made in water is known as an………. solution and indicated by the symbol…………….
Solution :
(a) Conservation of mass
(b) Aqueous; (aq)

Question 17:
(a) Give one example of a chemical reaction.
(b) State two characteristics of the chemical reaction which takes place when dilute sulphuric
acid is poured over zinc granules.
(c) Give two characteristics of the chemical reaction which occurs on adding potassium iodide
solution to lead nitrate solution.
Solution :
(a) Magnesium Ribbon is heated in the presence of air to form a white powder called
magnesium oxide.
(b) When dilute sulphuric acid is poured over zinc granules

1. there will be a rise in temperature
2. evolution of hydrogen gas.

(c)

1. A yellow precipitate is formed.
2. There will be a change in color (from colourless to yellow).

Question 18:
(a) What is a chemical equation ? Explain with the help of an example.
(b) Giving examples, state the difference between balanced and unbalanced chemical
equations.
(c) Balance the following chemical equations :

1. NH3  —–> N2 + H2
2. C +C02 —–> CO

Solution :
(a) The method of representing a chemical reaction with the help of symbols and formulae of
substances involved in it is called a chemical equation.
Example: Zinc metal reacts with dilute sulphuric acid to form zinc sulphate and hydrogen gas.
This equation is written as: Zn + H2SO4 —–> ZnSO4 + H2
(b) A balanced chemical equation has an equal number of atoms of different elements in the
reactants and products. It has equal masses of various elements in the reactants and
products.



Example: Zn + H2SO4 —–> ZnSO4 + H2
An unbalanced chemical equation has an unequal number of atoms of one or more elements
in the reactants and products. It has unequal masses of various elements in the reactants and
products.
Example: H2 + O2 —–> 2H2O
(c)

1. 2NH3 —–> N2 + 3H2
2. C + CO2 —–> 2CO

Question 19:
When hydrogen is passed over copper oxide, copper and steam are formed. Write a balanced
equation for this reaction and state which of the chemicals are :

1. elements
2. compounds
3. reactants
4. products
5. metals
6. non-metals

Solution :
H2 + CuO —–> Cu + H2O

1. Elements : H2 and Cu
2. Compounds : CuO and H2O
3. Reactants: H2 and CuO
4. Products: Cu
5. Metal: Cu
6. Non-metal: H2

Question 20:
(a) What are the various ways in which a chemical equation can be made more informative ?
Give examples to illustrate your answer.
(b) Write balanced chemical equation from the following information :
An aqueous calcium hydroxide solution (lime water) reacts with carbon dioxide gas to produce
a solid calcium carbonate precipitate and water.
Solution :
(a) The various ways in which a chemical equation can be made more informative are :
(i) By indicating the physical states of the reactants and products. Example: Gaseous state is
indicated by the symbol (g).
Zn (s) + H2SO4 (aq) —–> ZnSO4 (aq) + H2 (g)
(ii) By indicating the heat changes taking place in the reaction. For xxample: An exothermic
reaction is indicated by writing “+Heat” or “+Heat energy” or “+Energy” on the products side of
an equation.
C (s) + O2 (g) —–> CO2 (g) + Heat
(iii) By indicating the “conditions” under which the reaction takes place.
Example: Delta stands for heat which is written over the arrow of the equation.



(b) Ca(OH)2 (aq) + CO2 (g) —–> CaCO3 (s) + H2O (l)

Question 21:
(a) What is a balanced chemical equation ? Why should chemical equations be balanced ?
(b) Aluminium burns in chlorine to form aluminium chloride (AlCl3). Write a balanced chemical
equation for this reaction.
(c) Potassium metal reacts with water to give potassium hydroxide and hydrogen gas. Write a
balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
Solution :
(a) A balanced chemical equation has an equal number of atoms of different elements in the
reactants and products. It has equal masses of various elements in the reactants and
products. A chemical equation should be balanced to satisfy the law of conservation of
chemical reactions.
(b) 2Al + 3Cl2 —–> 2AlCl3
(c) 2K + 2H2O —–> 2KOH + H2

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:20

Question 22:
(a) Explain, with example, how the physical states of the reactants and products can be shown
in a chemical equation.
(b) Balance the following equation and add state symbols :
Zn + HCl ——– > ZnCl2 + H2
(c) Convey the following information in the form of a balanced chemical equation :
“An aqueous solution of ferrous sulphate reacts with an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide
to form a precipitate of ferrous hydroxide and sodium sulphate remains in solution.”
Solution :
(a) The physical
states of the reactants and products are shown by putting the “state symbols”
in an equation.
For example: Zn (s)
+ H2SO4 (aq) —–> ZnSO4 (aq) + H2
(g)
b) Zn (s) + 2HCl(aq) —–> ZnCl2 (aq) + H2 (g)
(c) FeSO4(aq)+ 2NaOH (aq) —–> Fe(OH)2 (s) + Na2SO4(aq)

Question 23:
Write any two observations in an activity which may suggest that a chemical reaction has
taken place. Give an example in support of your answer.
Solution :

1.  Evolution of gas.
For example: When sodium carbonate reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid, carbon
dioxide gas is evolved.

2.  Formation of a precipitate.
For example: When potassium iodide solution is added to a solution of lead nitrate,
yellow precipitate of lead iodide is formed.

Question 24:
(a) Aluminium hydroxide reacts with sulphuric acid to form aluminium sulphate and water.
Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
(b) Balance the following chemical equation :



MnO2 + HCl —–> MnCl2 + Cl2 + H2O
Solution :
(a) 2Al(OH)3+ 3H2SO4 —–> Al2(SO4)3+ 6H2O
(b) MnO2+ 4HCl —–> MnCl2+ Cl2 + 2H2O

Question 25:
 Write the balanced equations for the following reactions, and add the state symbols :
(a)  Magnesium carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce magnesium chloride,
carbon dioxide and water.
(b) Sodium hydroxide reacts with sulphuric acid to produce sodium sulphate and water.
Solution :
(a) MgCO3 (s) + 2HCl (aq) MgCl2 (aq) + CO2 (g) + H2O (l)
(b) 2NaOH (aq) + H2SO4 (aq) Na2SO4 (aq) + 2H2O (l)

Question 26:
Carbon monoxide reacts with hydrogen under certain conditions to form methanol (CH 3OH).
Write a balanced chemical equation for this reaction indicating the physical states of reactants
and product as well as the conditions under which this reaction takes place.
Solution :

The conditions for this reaction to take place are: a pressure of 300 atmospheres (written as
300 atm), a temperature of 300oC, and a catalyst which is a mixture of zinc oxide and
chromium oxide (ZnO + CrO3).

Question 27:
(a) Potassium chlorate (KClO3) on heating forms potassium chloride and oxygen. Write a
balanced equation
for this reaction and indicate the evolution of gas.
(b) Rewrite the following information in the form of a balanced chemical equation :
Magnesium burns in carbon dioxide to form magnesium oxide and carbon.
Solution :
(a) 2KClO3
(s) 2KCl (s) + 3O2 (g)
(b) 2Mg + CO2 —–> 2MgO + C

Question 28:
(a) Substitute formulae for names and balance the following equation :
Calcium carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce calcium chloride, water and
carbon dioxide gas.
(b) Write balanced chemical equation with state symbols for the following reaction :
Sodium hydroxide solution reacts with hydrochloric acid solution to produce sodium chloride
solution and water.
Solution :
(a) CaCO3+ 2HCl —–> CaCl2 + H2O + CO2
(b) NaOH (aq) + HCl(aq) —–> NaCl (aq) + H2O (l)

Question 29:
Ammonia reacts with oxygen to form nitrogen and water. Write a balanced chemical equation
for this reaction. Add the state symbols for all the reactants and products.
Solution :



4NH3 (g)+ 3O2 (g) —–> 2N2 (g) + 6H2O (l)

Question 30:
Write a balanced chemical equation for the process of photosynthesis giving the physical
states of all the substances involved and the conditions of the reaction.
Solution :
6CO2 (g) + 6H2O C6 —–> H12O6 (aq) + 6O2(g)
Carbon
dioxide Water
Glucose Oxygen

Question 31:
Translate the following statement into chemical equation and then balance it :
Barium chloride solution reacts with aluminium sulphate solution to form a precipitate of
barium sulphate and aluminium chloride solution.
Solution :
3BaCl2(aq) + Al2(SO4)3 (aq) —–> 3BaSO4 (s) + 2AlCl3(aq)

Question 32:
When potassium nitrate is heated, it decomposes into potassium nitrite and oxygen. Write a
balanced equation for this reaction and add the state symbols of the reactants and products.
Solution :
2KNO3 (s) —–> 2KNO2 (s) + O2(g)

Question 33:
(a) What is meant by a chemical reaction ? Explain with the help of an example.
(b) Give one example each of a chemical reaction characterised by :

1. evolution of a gas
2. change in colour
3. formation of a precipitate
4. change in temperature
5. change in state.

Solution :
(a)
Chemical reactions are the processes in which new substances with new properties are
formed.
For
example: When magnesium ribbon is heated, it burns in air to form a white powder called
magnesium oxide.
(b)

1. The chemical reaction between zinc and dilute sulphuric acid.
2. The chemical reaction between citric acid and purple coloured potassium permanganate

solution is characterised by change in colour (from purple to
colourless).

3. The chemical reaction between potassium iodide and lead nitrate is characterised by the
formation of a yellow precipitate of lead iodide.

4. The reaction between quick lime and water to form slaked lime is characterised by a
change in temperature.

5. When wax is burned, then water and carbon dioxide are formed. Wax is a solid;



water is a liquid whereas carbon dioxide is a gas.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:21

Question 34:
(a) State the various characteristics of chemical reactions.
(b) State one characteristic each of the chemical reaction which takes place when :

1. dilute hydrochloric acid is added to sodium carbonate
2. lemon juice is added gradually to potassium permanganate solution
3. dilute sulphuric acid is added to barium chloride solution
4. quicklime is treated with water
5. wax is burned in the form of a candle

Solution :
(a) The various characteristics of chemical reactions are:

1. Evolution of a gas
2. Formation of a precipitate
3. Change in colour
4. Change in temperature
5. Change in state.

(b)

1. Evolution of carbon dioxide gas
2. Change in colour from purple to colourless
3. Formation of white precipitate of barium sulphate
4. Change in temperature
5. Change in state from solid to liquid and gas.

Question 35:
(a) What do you understand by exothermic and endothermic reactions ?
(b) Give one example of an exothermic reaction and one of an endothermic reaction.
(c) Which of the following are endothermic reactions and which are exothermic reactions ?

1. Burning of natural gas
2. Photosynthesis
3. Electrolysis of water
4. Respiration
5. Decomposition of calcium carbonate

Solution :
(a) Those reactions in which heat is evolved are known as exothermic reactions.
The reactions in which heat is absorbed are known as endothermic reactions.
(b) Example of exothermic reaction:
C (s) + O2 (g) —–> CO2 + Heat
Example of endothermic reaction:
N2 (g) + O2 (g) + Heat —–> 2NO (g)
(c) Endothermic reactions: Photosynthesis, Electrolysis of water, Decomposition of calcium
carbonate.
Exothermic reactions: Burning of natural gas, Respiration.



Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:22

Question 46:
When the solution of substance X is added to a solution of potassium iodide, then a yellow
solid separates out from the solution.
(a) What do you think substance X is likely to be ?
(b) Name the substance which the yellow solid consists of.
(c) Which characteristic of chemical reactions is illustrated by this example ?
(d) Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction which takes place. Mention the
physical states of all the reactants and products involved in the chemical equation.
Solution :
(a) Lead nitrate.
(b) Lead iodide.
(c) Formation of a precipitate.
(d) Pb(NO3)2 (aq) + 2KI (aq) —–> PbI2 (s) + 2KNO3 (aq)

Question 47:
When water is added gradually to a white solid X, a hissing sound is heard and a lot of heat is
produced forming a product Y. A suspension of Y in water is applied to the walls of a house
during white washing. A clear solution of Y is also used for testing carbon dioxide gas in the
laboratory.
(a) What could be solid X ? Write its chemical formula.
(b) What could be product Y ? Write its chemical formula.
(c) What is the common name of the solution of Y which is used for testing carbon dioxide
gas ?
(d) Write chemical equation of the reaction which takes place on adding water to solid X.
(e) Which characteristic of chemical reactions is illustrated by this example ?
Solution :
(a) Calcium oxide, CaO.
(b) Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2 
(c) Lime water.
(d) CaO + H2O —–> Ca(OH)2
(e) Change in temperature.

Question 48:
When metal X is treated with a dilute acid Y, then a gas Z is evolved which burns readily by
making a little explosion.
(a) Name any two metals which can behave like metal X.
(b) Name any two acids which can behave like acid Y.
(c) Name the gas Z.
(d) Is the gas Z lighter than or heavier than air ?
(e)Is the reaction between metal X and dilute acid Y exothermic or endothermic ?
(f) By taking a specific example of metal X and dilute acid Y, write a balanced chemical
equation for the reaction which takes place. Also indicate physical states of all the reactants
and products.
Solution :
(a) Zinc and Iron.
(b) Dilute hydrochloric acid and dilute sulphuric acid.
(c) Hydrogen.
(d) Lighter than air.
(e) Exothermic.
(f) Suppose metal X is zinc (Zn) and acid Y is dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl) ;



Zn (s) + 2HCl (aq) ZnCl2 (aq) + H2 (g)

Question 49:
A solid substance P which is very hard is used in the construction of many buildings,
especially flooring. When substance P is heated strongly, it decomposes to form another solid
Q and a gas R is given out. Solid Q reacts with water with the release of a lot of heat to form a
substance S. When gas R is passed into a clear solution of substance S, then a white
precipitate of substance T is formed. The substance T has the same chemical composition as
starting substance P.
(a) What is substance P ? Write its common name as well as chemical formula.
(b) What is substance Q ?
(c) What is gas R ?
(d) What is substance S ? What is its clear solution known as ?
(e) What is substance T ? Name any two natural forms in which substance T occurs in nature.
Solution :
(a) Calcium carbonate (limestone), CaCO3
(b) Calcium oxide, CaO
(c) Carbon dioxide, CO2
(d) Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2; Lime water.
(e) Calcium carbonate; Limestone and Marble.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:23

Question 50:
A silvery-white metal X taken in the form of ribbon, when ignited, burns in air with a dazzling
white flame to form a white powder Y. When water is added to powder Y, it dissolves partially
to form another substance Z.
(a) What could metal X be ?
(b) What is powder Y ?
(c) With which substance metal X combines to form powder Y ?
(d) What is substance Z ? Name one domestic use of substance Z.
(e) Write a balanced chemical equation of the reaction which takes place when metal X burns
in air to form powder Y.
Solution :
(a) Magnesium, Mg.
(b) Magnesium oxide,MgO
(c) Oxygen (of air),O2
(d) Magnesiumhydroxide, Mg(OH)2; Used as antacid to relieve indigestion
(e) 2Mg + O2 —–> 2MgO

Question 51:
A metal X forms a salt XSO4. The salt XSO4 forms a clear solution in water which reacts with
sodium hydroxide solution to form a blue precipitate Y. Metal X is used in making electric
wires and alloys like brass.
(a) What do you think metal X could be ?
(b) Write the name, formula and colour of salt XSO4.
(c) What is the blue precipitate Y ?
(d) Write a chemical equation of the reaction which takes place when salt XSO4 reacts with
sodium hydroxide solution. Give the state symbols of all the reactants and products which
occur in the above equation.
Solution :
(a) Copper, Cu.



(b) Copper sulphate, CuSO4, Blue colour.
(c) Copper hydroxide, Cu(OH)2
(d) CuSO4 (aq) + 2NaOH (aq) —–> Cu(OH)2 (s) + Na2S04 (aq)

Question 52:
The metal M reacts vigorously with water to form a solution S and a gas G. The solution S
turns red litmus to blue whereas gas G, which is lighter than air, burns with a pop sound. Metal
M has a low melting point and it is used as a coolant in nuclear reactors.
(a) What is metal M ?
(b) What is solution S ? Is it acidic or alkaline ?
(c) What is gas G ?
(d) Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction which takes place when metal M
reacts with water.
(e) Is this reaction exothermic or endothermic ?
Solution :
(a) Sodium, Na.
(b) Sodium hydroxide
solution (NaOH solution), Alkaline. (c) Hydrogen, H2
(d) 2Na + 2H2O —–> 2NaOH + H2
(e) Exothermic.

Question 53:
When a mixture of gases X and Y is compressed to 300 atm pressure and then passed over a
catalyst consisting of a mixture of zinc oxide and chromium oxide (heated to a temperature of
300°C), then an organic compound Z having the molecular formula CH4O is formed. X is a
highly poisonous gas which is formed in appreciable amounts when a fuel burns in a limited
supply of air ; Y is a gas which can be made by the action of a dilute acid on an active metal;
and Z is a liquid organic compound which can react with sodium metal to produce hydrogen
gas.
(a) What are X, Y and Z ?
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation of the reaction which takes place when X and Y
combine to form Z. Indicate the conditions under which the reaction occurs.
Solution :
(a) X is carbon monoxide gas (CO); Y is hydrogen gas (H2) ; Z is methanol (or Methyl alcohol)
(CH3OH)
(CH40 = CH3OH)
(b) Formation of Z:

The conditions for this reaction to take place are: a pressure of 300 atmospheres (written as
300 atm), a temperature of 300oC, and a catalyst which is a mixture of zinc oxide and
chromium oxide (ZnO + CrO3).

Question 54:
The white solid compound A decomposes quite rapidly on heating in the presence of a black
substance X to form a solid compound B and a gas C. When an aqueous solution of
compound B is reacted with silver nitrate solution, then a white precipitate of silver chloride is
obtained along with potassium nitrate solution. Gas C does not burn itself but helps burn other
things.
(a) What is compound A ?
(b) What is compound B ?
(c) What is gas C ?



(d) What do you think is the black substance X ? What is its function ?
(e) What is the general name of substances like X ?
Solution :
(a) Potassium chlorate, KClO3
(b) Potassium chloride, KCl
(c) Oxygen, O2
(d) Manganese dioxide, MnO2; It acts as a catalyst in the decomposition of potassium chlorate
to form oxygen gas
(e) Catalysts

Question 55:
Gas A, which is the major cause of global warming, combines with hydrogen oxide B in nature
in the presence of an environmental factor C and a green material D to form a six carbon
organic compound E and a gas F. The gas F is necessary for breathing.
(a) What is gas A ?
(b) What is the common name of B ?
(c) What do you think could be C ?
(d) What is material D ? Where is it found ?
Solution :
(a) Carbon dioxide,CO2
(b) Water, H2O
(c) Sunlight.
(d) Chlorophyll;Green leaves of plants.
(e) Glucose, C6H12O6
(f) Oxygen;
Photosynthesis.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:45

Question 1:
What type of reaction is represented by the digestion of food in our body ?
Solution :
Decomposition reaction.

Question 2:
Name the various types of chemical reactions.
Solution :
The various types of chemical reactions are:

1. Combination reactions.
2. Decomposition reaction.
3. Displacement reaction.
4. Double displacement reaction.
5. Oxidation and reduction reactions.

Question 3:
Why does-the colour of copper sulphate solution change when an iron nail is kept immersed in
it ?
Solution :
The colour of copper sulphate solution changes when iron nail is kept immersed in it due to
the displacement reaction taking place between iron and copper leading to formation of iron
sulphate.



Question 4:
Write the balanced chemical equation for the following reaction :
Zinc + Silver nitrate —–> Zinc nitrate + Silver
Solution :
Zn + 2AgNO3 —–> Zn(NO3)2 + 2Ag

Question 5:
Which term is used to indicate the development of unpleasant smell and taste in fat and oil
containing foods due to aerial oxidation (when they are kept exposed for a considerable time)
?
Solution :
Rancidity.

Question 6:
What is the general name of the chemicals which are added to fat and oil containing foods to
prevent the development of rancidity
Solution :
Anti-oxidants.

Question 7:
State an important use of decomposition reactions.
Solution :
The digestion of food in the body is an example of decomposition reaction.

Question 8:
What are anti-oxidants ? Why are they added to fat and oil containing foods ?
Solution :
Anti-oxidant is a substance which prevents oxidation. They are added to fat and oil
containing foods so that they do not get oxidized easily and hence do not
turn rancid.

Question 9:
Explain why, food products containing fats and oils (like potato chips) are packaged in
nitrogen.
Solution :
Food products containing fats and oils are packaged in nitrogen so that there is no oxygen to
cause oxidation of food and make it rancid.

Question 10:
Give one example of a decomposition reaction which is carried out:
(a) with electricity
(b) by applying heat
Solution :
(a) When fused sodium chloride is decomposed by passing electricity, sodium metal is
obtained.
(b) When lead nitrate is heated strongly, it breaks down to form lead monoxide, nitrogen
dioxide and oxygen.

Question 11:
What type of chemical reaction is used to extract metals from their naturally occurring
compounds like oxides or chlorides ?
Solution :



Decomposition
reactions (carried out by electricity).

Question 12:
Name two anti-oxidants which are usually added to fat and oil containing foods to prevent
rancidity.
Solution :
BHA (Butylated
Hydroxy Anisole) and BHT (Butylated Hydroxy Toluene).

Question 13:
Write one equation each for the decomposition reactions where energy is supplied in the form
of  (a) heat,
(b) light, and (c) electricity.
Solution :

Question 14:
In the refining of silver, the recovery of silver from silver nitrate solution involved displacement
by copper metal. Write down the chemical equation of the reaction involved.
Solution :
2AgNO3 (aq) + Cu (s) —–>Cu(NO3)2 (aq) + 2Ag (s)

Question 15:
What type of reactions are represented by the following equations ?

1. CaC03 ——- > CaO + C02
2. CaO + H20 ——- > Ca(OH)2
3. 2FeSO 4 ——- >Fe203 + S02 + S03
4. NH4Cl  —–> NH3+HCl
5. 2Ca+O2 ——- > 2CaO

Solution :

1. Decomposition.
2. Combination.
3. Decomposition.
4. Decomposition.
5. Combination.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:46

Question 16:
What type of chemical reactions take place when :



(a) a magnesium wire is burnt in air ?
(b) lime-stone is heated ?
(c) silver bromide is exposed to sunlight ?
(d) electricity is passed through water ?
(e) ammonia and hydrogen chloride are mixed ?
Solution :
(a) Combination.
(b) Decomposition.
(c) Decomposition.
(d) Decomposition.
(e) Combination.

Question 17:
What type of chemical reactions are represented by the following equations ?

1. A + BC ——- > AC + B
2. A + B ——- > C
3. X ——- > Y + Z
4. PQ + RS —— > PS + RQ
5. A2O3 + 2B —–> B2O3 + 2A

Solution :

1. Displacement reaction.
2. Combination reaction.
3. Decomposition reaction.
4. Double displacement reaction.
5. Displacement reaction.

Question 18:
Balance the following chemical equations :

Solution :

Question 19:
Which of the following is a combination and which is a displacement reaction ?
(a) Cl2 + 2KI ——-> 2KCl + I2
(b) 2K + Cl2 ——–> 2KCl
Solution :
(a) Displacement reaction.
(b) Combination reaction.

Question 20:
What type of reactions are represented by the following equations ?
(a) CaO + CO2 ———- > CaCO3
(b) 2Na + 2H2O —— > 2NaOH + H2
(c) Mg + CuS04——— > MgSO4 + Cu



(d) NH4NO2 ——- > N2 + 2H2O
(e) CuS04 + 2NaOH ——– > Cu(OH)2 + Na2SO4
Solution :
(a) Combination reaction.
(b) Displacement reaction.
(c) Displacement reaction.
(d) Decomposition reaction.
(e) Double displacement reaction.

Question 21:
In the following reaction between lead sulphide and hydrogen peroxide :
PbS (s) + 4H2O2 (aq) ————-> PbS04 (s) + 4H2O (l)
(a) Which substance is reduced ?
(b) Which substance is oxidised ?
Solution :
(a) H2O2
(b) PbS

Question 22:
Identify the component oxidised in the following reaction :
H2S + Cl2 ————->S + 2HCl
Solution :
H2S

Question 23:
When S02 gas is passed through saturated solution of H 2S, the following reaction occurs :
SO2 + 2H2S ———– > 2H2O + 3S
In this reaction, which substance is oxidised and which one is reduced ?
Solution :
Substance oxidised: H2S
Substance reduced: SO2

Question 24:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The addition of oxygen to a substance is called ……………………… whereas removal of oxygen is
called……
(b) The addition of hydrogen to a substance is called……… whereas removal of hydrogen is
called………..
(c) Anti-oxidants are often added to fat containing foods to prevent………….. due to oxidation.
Solution :
(a) Oxidation; reduction.
(b) Reduction; oxidation.
(c) Rancidity.

Question 25:
What is an oxidation reaction ? Identify in the following reaction
(i) the substance oxidised, and (ii) the substance reduced :
ZnO + C ———— > Zn + CO
Solution :
Oxidation Reaction: The addition of oxygen (or removal of hydrogen) to a substance is called
oxidation.
(i) C (ii) ZnO



Question 26:
(a) What is a redox reaction ? Explain with an example.
(b) When a magnesium ribbon burns in air with a dazzling flame and forms a white ash, is
magnesium oxidised or reduced ? Why ?
(c) In the reaction represented by the equation :
MnO2 + 4Hl ———–> MnCl2 + 2H2O + Cl2

1. name the substance oxidised.
2. name the oxidising agent.
3. name the substance reduced.
4. name the reducing agent.

Solution :
(a) The oxidation and reduction reactions occurring together are called a redox reaction.
Example:
In this reaction, copper oxide is being reduced to copper whereas hydrogen is being oxidised to
water.
(b) Magnesium is oxidised as addition of oxygen to magnesium takes place leading to

formation of magnesium oxide.

(c)

1. HCl
2. MnO2
3. MnO2
4.  HCl

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:47

Question 27:
(a) Define a combination reaction.
(b) Give one example of a combination reaction which is also exothermic.
(c) Give one example of a combination reaction which is also endothermic.
Solution :
(a) Those reactions in which two or more substances combine to form a single substance is
called
a combination reaction.

Question 28:
(a) Give an example of an oxidation reaction.
(b) Is oxidation an exothermic or an endothermic reaction ?
(c) Explain, by giving an example, how oxidation and reduction proceed side by side.
Solution :

In this reaction, copper oxide is being reduced to copper whereas hydrogen is being oxidised to
water.

Question 29:
(a) What is the colour of ferrous sulphate crystals ? How does this colour change   after



heating ?
(b) Name the product formed on strongly heating ferrous sulphate crystals. What type of
chemical reaction
occurs in this change ?
Solution :
(a) The colour of ferrous sulphate is green. It changes to brown after heating.
(b) The product formed is ferric oxide. This is a decomposition reaction.

Question 30:
What is a decomposition reaction ? Give an example of a decomposition reaction. Describe an
activity to illustrate such a reaction by heating.
Solution :

This decomposition takes place in the presence of heat and catalyst. In this decomposition
reaction, a single compound, potassium chlorate, is splitting up into two simpler substances,
potassium chloride and oxygen. This decomposition reaction is used for preparing oxygen gas
in the laboratory.

Question 31:
Zinc oxide reacts with carbon, on heating, to form zinc metal and carbon monoxide. Write a
balanced chemical equation for this reaction. Name (i) oxidising agent, and (ii) reducing agent,
in this reaction.
Solution :
ZnO + C
(i) Zinc oxide.
(ii) Carbon.

Question 32:
Give one example of an oxidation-reduction reaction which is also :
(a) a combination reaction
(b) a displacement reaction
Solution :

Question 33:
(a) What is the difference between displacement and double displacement reactions ? Write
equations for
these reactions.
(b) What do you mean by a precipitation reaction ? Explain giving an example.
Solution :
(a) Those reactions in which one element takes the place of another element in a compound,



are known as displacement reactions.
Equation: CuSO4 (aq)+ Zn (s)—–>ZnSO4+ Cu
Those reactions in which two compounds react by an exchange of ions to form two new
compounds are called double displacement reactions.
Equation: AgNO3 (aq) + NaCl (aq)—–>AgCl (s)+ NaNO3 (aq)
(b) Any reaction in which an insoluble solid (called precipitate) is formed that separates from
the solution is called a precipitation reaction.
Example: The reaction between barium chloride and sodium sulphate solution to form a white
barium sulphate precipitate (alongwith sodium chloride solution) is an example of a
precipitation reaction.

Question 35:
(a) Define the following in terms of gain or loss of hydrogen with one example each :
(i) oxidation (ii) reduction
(b) When a magnesium ribbon is heated, it burns in air to form magnesium oxide. Write a
balanced chemical equation for this reaction. Name (i) substance oxidised, and (ii) substance
reduced.
Solution :
(a) (i) H2S + Cl2—–>S + 2HCl
In this reaction, H2S is changing into S. That is, Hydrogen is being removed from hydrogen
sulphide. Now, by definition, the removal of hydrogen from a compound is called oxidation, so,
we can say that hydrogen sulphide is being oxidised to sulphur. On the other hand, Cl2 is
changing into HCl. That is, hydrogen is being added to chlorine. By definition, the addition of
hydrogen to a substance is called reduction, so we can say that chlorine is being reduced to
hydrogen chloride.
(b) 2Mg + O2—–>2MgO
(i) Mg (ii) O2

Question 36:
What is meant by (a) displacement reaction, and (b) double displacement reaction ? Explain
with the help of one example each.
Solution :
(a) Those reactions in which one element takes the place of another element in a compound,
are known as displacement reactions.
Example: CuSO4 (aq) + Zn (s) —–>ZnSO4 + Cu
When a strip of zinc metal is placed in copper sulphate solution, then zinc sulphate solution
and copper are obtained. In this reaction, zinc displaces copper from copper sulphate
compound so that copper is set free. The blue colour of copper sulphate solution fades due to
the formation of zinc sulphate.
(b) Those reactions in which two compounds react by an exchange of ions to form two new
compounds are called double displacement reactions.
Example: AgNO3 (aq) + NaCl (aq)
When silver nitrate solution is added to sodium chloride solution, then a white precipitate of
silver chloride is formed along with sodium nitrate solution. In this reaction, two compounds,
silver nitrate and sodium chloride, react to form two new compounds, silver chloride and
sodium nitrate.

Question 37:
(a) Why are decomposition reactions called the opposite of combination reactions ? Explain



with equations
of these reactions.
(b) Express the following facts in the form of a balanced chemical equation :
“When a strip of copper metal is placed in a solution of silver nitrate, metallic silver is
precipitated and a solution containing copper nitrate is formed”.
Solution :
Those reactions in which a compound splits up into two or more simpler substances are
known as decomposition reactions.
Example: When calcium carbonate is heated, it decomposes to give calcium oxide and carbon
dioxide.
They are called opposite of combination reactions because in a combination reaction, two or
more substances combine to form a single substance.
Example: Magnesium and oxygen combine, when heated, to form magnesium oxide.
(b) Cu (s) + 2AgNO3 (aq)—–>Cu(NO3)2 (aq) + 2Ag (s)

Question 38:
(a) What happens when a piece of iron metal is placed in copper sulphate solution ? Name the
type ofreaction involved.
(b) Write balanced chemical equation with state symbols for the following reaction :Barium
chloride solution reacts with sodium sulphate solution to give insoluble barium sulphate and a
solution of sodium chloride.
Solution :
(a) When a piece of iron metal is placed in copper sulphate solution, then magnesium sulphate
solution and copper metal are formed. This is a type of displacement reaction.

Question 39:
In the reaction represented by the following equation :
CuO(s) + H2(g) ————- > Cu (s) + H20(1)
(a) name the substance oxidised
(b) name the substance reduced
(c) name the oxidising agent
(d) name the reducing agent
Solution :
(a) H2
(b) CuO
(c) CuO
(d) H2

Question 40:
What happens when silver nitrate solution is added to sodium chloride solution ?
(a) Write the equation for the reaction which takes place.



(b) Name the type of reaction involved.
Solution :
When silver nitrate
solution is added to sodium chloride solution, then a white precipitate of
silver chloride is formed alongwith sodium nitrate solution.
(a) AgNO3(aq) + NaCl (aq)
(b) Double displacement reaction.

Question 41:
What happens when silver chloride is exposed to sunlight ? Write a chemical equation for this
reaction. Also give one use of such a reaction.
Solution :
When silver chloride is exposed to light, it decomposes to form silver metal and chlorine gas.

This reaction is used in black and white photography.

Question 42:
What happens when a zinc strip is dipped into a copper sulphate solution ?
(a) Write the equation for the reaction that takes place.
(b) Name the type of reaction involved.
Solution :
When a strip of zinc metal is placed in copper sulphate solution, then zinc sulphate solution
and copper are obtained.

Chemical Reactions and Equations – Lakhmir Singh
class 10 Chemistry Solutions 42

(b) Displacement reaction.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:48

Question 43:
(a) Explain the term “corrosion” with an example. Write a chemical equation to show the
process of corrosion of iron.
(b) What special name is given to the corrosion of iron ?
(c) What type of chemical reaction is involved in the corrosion of iron ?
(d) Name any three objects (or structures) which are gradually damaged by the corrosion of
iron and steel.
Solution :
(a) Corrosion is the process in which metals are eaten up gradually by the action of air,
moisture or a chemical (such as an acid) on their surface. Rusting of iron metal is the most
common form of corrosion.
During the corrosion of iron, iron metal is oxidised by the oxygen of air in the presence of water
(moisture) to form hydrated iron oxide called rust.



(b) Rusting.
(c) Oxidation.
(d) Railings, car bodies and bridges.

Question 44:
(a) Explain the term “rancidity”. What damage is caused by rancidity ?
(b) What type of chemical reaction is responsible for causing rancidity ?
(c) State and explain the various methods for preventing or retarding rancidity of food.
Solution :
(a) The condition produced by aerial oxidation of fats and oils in foods marked by unpleasant
smell and taste is called rancidity. It spoils the food materials prepared in fats and oils which
have been kept for a considerable time and makes them unfit for eating.
(b) Oxidation.
(c)

1. Rancidity can be prevented by adding anti-oxidants to foods containing fats and oils.
2. It can be prevented by packaging fat and oil containing foods in nitrogen gas.
3. Rancidity can be retarded by keeping food in a refrigerator.
4. Rancidity can be prevented by storing food in air-tight containers.
5. Storing foods away from light can also prevent rancidity.

Question 45:
(a) What happens when an aqueous solution of sodium sulphate reacts with an aqueous
solution of barium chloride ?
(b) Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction which takes place.
(c) State the physical conditions of reactants in which the reaction will not take place.
(d) Name the type of chemical reaction which occurs.
(e) Give one example of another reaction which is of the same type as the above reaction.
Solution :
(a) When barium chloride solution is added to sodium sulphate solution, then a white
precipitate of barium sulphate is formed along with sodium chloride solution.

(c) Solid sodium sulphate and Solid barium chloride
(d) Double displacement reaction.
(e) Double displacement reaction between silver nitrate solution and sodium chloride solution
forms a white precipitate of silver chloride and sodium nitrate solution.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:49

Question 58:
When a green iron salt is heated strongly, its colour finally changes to brown and odour of
burning sulphur is given out.
(a) Name the iron salt.
(b) Name the type of reaction that takes place during the heating of iron salt.
(c) Write a chemical equation for the reaction involved.
Solution :
(a) Ferrous sulphate.
(b) Decomposition reaction.



(c)

Question 59:
A colourless lead salt, when heated, produces a yellow residue and brown fumes.
(a) Name the lead salt.
(b) Name the brown fumes.
(c) Write a chemical equation of the reaction involved.
Solution :
(a) Lead nitrate.
(b) Nitrogen dioxide.
(c)

Question 60:
When hydrogen burns in oxygen, water is formed and when water is electrolysed, then
hydrogen and oxygen are produced. What type of reaction takes place :
(a) in the first case ?
(b) in the second case ?
Solution :
(a) Combination reaction.
(b) Decomposition reaction.

Question 61:
A strip of metal X is dipped in a blue coloured salt solution YSO4. After some time, a layer of
metal Y from the salt solution is formed on the surface of metal strip X. Metal X is used in
galvanisation whereas metal Y is used in making electric wires. Metal X and metal Y together
form an alloy Z.
(a) What could metal X be ?
(b) What could metal Y be ?
(c) Name the metal salt YSO4.
(d) What type of chemical reaction takes place when metal X reacts with salt solution YSO4 ?
Write the equation of the chemical reaction involved.
(e) Name the alloy Z.
Solution :
(b) Copper (Cu)
(c) Copper sulphate (CuSO4)
(d) Displacement reaction;
CuSO4 (aq) + Zn (s)
ZnSO4 (aq) + Cu (s)
(e) Brass

Question 62:
When a black metal compound XO is heated with a colourless gas Y 2, then metal X and
another compound Y2O are formed. Metal X is red-brown in colour which does not react with
dilute acids at all. Gas Y2 can be prepared by the action of a dilute acid on any active metal. The
compound Y2O is a liquid at room temperature which can turn anhydrous copper sulphate
blue.



(a) What do you think is metal X ?
(b) What could be gas Y2 ?
(c) What is compound XO ?
(d) What is compound Y2O?
(e) Write the chemical equation of the reaction which takes place on heating XO with Y2.
(f) What type of chemical reaction is illustrated in the above equation ?
Solution :
(a) Copper (Cu)
(b) Hydrogen (H2)
(c) Copper oxide (CuO)
(d) Water (H2O)
(e) CuO + H2
Cu + H2O
(f) Displacement reaction (which is also a redox reaction).

Question 63:
A metal X forms a water soluble salt XNO3 . When an aqueous solution of XNO3 is added to
common salt solution, then a white precipitate of compound Y is formed along with sodium
nitrate solution. Metal X is said to be the best conductor of electricity and it does not evolve
hydrogen when put in dilute hydrohloric acid.
(a) What is metal X ?
(b) What is salt XNO3 ?
(c) Name the compound Y.
(d) Write the chemical equation of the reaction which takes place on reacting XNO3 solution
and common salt solution giving the physical states of all the reactants and products.
(e) What type of chemical reaction is illustrated by the above equation ?
Solution :
Silver (Ag)
(b) Silver nitrate (AgNO3)
(c) Silver chloride (AgCl)
(d) AgNO3(aq) + NaCl (aq)—–>AgCl (s) + NaNO3 (aq)
(e) Double displacement reaction.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:50

Question 64:
Two metals X and Y form the salts XSO4 and Y2SO4, respectively. The solution of salt XSO4 is
blue in colour whereas that of Y2SO4 is colourless. When barium chloride solution is added to
XSO4 solution, then a white precipitate Z is formed along with a salt which turns the solution
green. And when barium chloride solution is added to Y2SO4 solution, then the same white
precipitate Z is formed along with colourless common salt solution.
(a) What could the metals X and Y be ?
(b) Write the name and formula of salt XSO4.
(c) Write the name and formula of salt Y2SO4.
(d) What is the name and formula of white precipitate Z ?
(e) Write the name and formula of the salt which turns the solution green in the first case.
Solution :
(a) Metal X : Copper; Metal Y : Sodium
(b) Copper sulphate, CuSO4
(c) Sodium sulphate, Na2SO4
(d) Barium sulphate, BaSO4
(e) Copper chloride, CuCl2



Question 65:
A red-brown metal X forms a salt XSO4. When hydrogen sulphide gas is passed through an
aqueous solution of XSO4, then a black precipitate of XS is formed alongwith sulphuric acid
solution.
(a) What could the salt XSO4 be ?
(b) What is the colour of salt XSO4 ?
(c) Name the black precipitate XS.
(d) By using the formula of the salt obtained in (a) above, write an equation of the reaction
which takes place when hydrogen sulphide gas is passed through its aqueous solution.
(e) What type of chemical reaction takes place in this case ?
Solution :
(a) Copper sulphate.
(b) Blue colour.
(c) Copper sulphide.
(d) CuSO4 (aq) + H2S (g)—–>CuS (s) + H2SO4 (aq)
(e) Double displacement reaction.

Question 66:
When a strip of red-brown metal X is placed in a colourless salt solution YNO 3 then metal Y is
set free and a blue coloured salt solution X(NO3)2 is formed. The liberated metal Y forms a
shining white deposit on the strip of metal X.
(a) What do you think metal X is ?
(b) Name the salt YNO3.
(c) What could be metal Y ?
(d) Name the salt X(NO3)2.
(e) What type of reaction takes place between metal X and salt solution YNO3 ?
Solution :
(a) Copper.
(b) Silver nitrate.
(c) Silver.
(d) Copper nitrate.
(e) Displacement reaction.

Question 67:
A metal salt MX when exposed to light splits up to form metal M and a gas X 2. Metal M is
used in making ornaments whereas gas X2 is used in making bleaching powder. The salt MX
is itself used in black and white photography.
(a) What do you think metal M is ?
(b) What could be gas X2 ?
(c) Name the metal salt MX.
(d) Name any two salt solutions which on mixing together can produce a precipitate of salt
MX.
(e) What type of chemical reaction takes place when salt MX is exposed to light ? Write the
equation of the reaction.
Solution :
(a) Silver.
(b) Chlorine.
(c) Silver chloride.
(d) Silver nitrate and Sodium chloride.
(e) Decomposition reaction;



Electricity

Question 1:
By what other name is the unit joule/coulomb called ?
Solution :
Volt

Question 2:
Which of the following statements correctly defines a volt ?
(a) a volt is a joule per ampere.
(b) a volt is a joule per coulomb.
Solution :
(b) a volt is a joule per coulomb.

Question 3:
(a) What do the letters p.d. stand for ?
(b) Which device is used to measure p.d. ?
Solution :
(a) p.d. stands for potential difference.
(b) Voltmeter is used to measure p.d.

Question 4:
What is meant by saying that the electric potential at a point is 1 volt ?
Solution :
Electric potential at a point is 1 volt means 1 joule of work is done in moving 1 unit positive
charge from infinity to that point.

Question 5:
How much work is done when one coulomb charge moves against a potential difference of 1
volt ?
Solution :
Potential difference = 1 V

Charge moved = 1C
Work done = Potential difference x Charge moved
= 1 x 1 = 1 J



Question 6:
What is the SI unit of potential difference ?
Solution :
Volt

Question 7:
How much work is done in moving a charge of 2 C across two points having a potential
difference of 12 V ?
Solution :
Given,
Potential difference = 12 V,Charge moved = 2 C
We know that,
Work done= p.d. x charge moved
= 12 x 2
= 24 joules.

Question 8:
What is the unit of electric charge ?
Solution :
Coulomb

Question 9:
Define one coulomb charge.
Solution :
One coulomb of charge is that quantity of charge which exerts a force of 9 × 109 Newton on
an equal charge is placed at a distance of 1 m from it.

Question 10:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Potential difference is measured in………….. by using a……………. placed in………… across a
component.
(b) Copper is a good………….. Plastic is an……………
Solution :
(a) volts; voltmeter; parallel
(b) conductor; insulator

Question 11:
What is meant by conductors and insulators ? Give two examples of conductors and two of
insulators.
Solution :
Conductors:- Those substances through which electricity can flow are known as conductors.
E.g., Copper, silver etc.
Insulators:- Those substances through which electricity cannot flow are known as insulators.
E.g., Plastic, cotton etc.

Question 12:
Which of the following are conductors and which are insulators ?
Sulphur, Silver, Copper, Cotton, Aluminium, Air, Nichrome, Graphite, Paper, Porcelain, Mercury,



Mica, Bakelite, Polythene, Manganin.
Solution :
Conductor:- Silver, Copper, Aluminum, Nichrome, Graphite, Mercury, Manganin
Insulators:- Sulphur, Cotton, Air, Paper, Porcelain, Mica, Bakelite, Polythene

Question 13:
What do you understand by the term “electric potential” ? (or potential) at a point ? What is the
unit of electric potential ?
Solution :
The electric potential (or potential) at a point in an electric field is defined as the work done in
moving a unit positive charge from infinity to that point.
Unit of electric potential is volt.

Question 14:
(a) State the relation between potential difference, work done and charge moved.
(b) Calculate the work done in moving a charge of 4 coulombs from a point at 220 volts to
another point at 230 volts.
Solution :
(a) Potential difference = Work done/Charge moved.
(b) V1=220 V, V2=230V, Charge moved=4C
Thus, the potential difference= V2- V1 =230-220
=10.
We know that,
Work done = Potential difference x Charge moved
= 10 x 4
Work done = 40 joules

Question 15:
(a) Name a device that helps to measure the potential difference across a conductor.
(b) How much energy is transferred by a 12 V power supply to each coulomb of charge which
it moves around a circuit ?
Solution :
(a) Voltmeter
(b) Given : Potential difference=12V, Charge moved=1C
We know that,
Work done = Potential difference x charge moved
= 12 x 1 = 12 joules
Since work done on each coulomb of charge is 12 joules, the energy given to each coulomb of
charge is also 12 joules.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:6

Question 16:
(a) What do you understand by the term “potential difference” ?
(b) What is meant by saying that the potential difference between two points is 1 volt ?
(c) What is the potential difference between the terminals of a battery if 250 joules of work is
required to transfer 20 coulombs of charge from one terminal of battery to the other ?
(d) What is a voltmeter ? How is a voltmeter connected in the circuit to measure the potential
difference between two points. Explain with the help of a diagram.
(e) State whether a voltmeter has a high resistance or a low resistance. Give reason for your
answer.
Solution :



(a) Potential difference between two points in an electric circuit is defined as the amount of
work done in moving a unit charge from one
point to the other point.
(b) The potential difference between two points is 1 volt means 1 joule of work is done in
moving 1 coulomb of electric charge from one point to the other.
(c) Given: Work done = 250J, Charge moved = 20C.
we know that,Potential difference = Work done/Charge moved
=250/20=12.5
(d) A voltmeter is a device which is used to measure the potential difference between two
points in an electric circuit. Voltmeter is always connected in parallel across the two points
where the potential difference is to be measured.

(e) Voltmeter has a high resistance so that it takes a negligible current from the circuit.

Question 22:
Three 2 V cells are connected in series and used as a battery in a circuit.
(a) What is the p.d. at the terminals of the battery ?
(b) How many joules of electrical energy does 1 C gain on passing through (i) one cell (ii) all
three cells ?
Solution :
(a) If three cells of 2 volt each are connected in series to make a battery, then the total
potential difference between terminals of the battery will be 6V.
(b) (i) Given: p.d. = 2V, Charge moved = 1C
We know that
Work done = p.d. x charge moved
= 2 x 1
Work done = 2 joules
(ii) Given: p.d. = 6V, Charge moved = 1C
Work done = p.d. x charge moved
= 6 x1
Work done = 6 joule.

Question 23:
The atoms of copper contain electrons and the atoms of rubber also contain electrons. Then
why does copper conduct electricity but rubber does not conduct electricity ?
Solution :
Copper has free electrons that are loosely held by the nuclei of the atoms. These free
electrons result in conduction of electricity.
The electrons present in rubber are strongly held by the nuclei of its atoms. So, rubber does
not have free electrons to conduct electricity.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:11



Question 1:
By what name is the physical quantity coulomb/second called ?
Solution :
Ampere

Question 2:
What is the flow of charge called ?
Solution :
Electric Current.

Question 3:
What actually travels through the wires when you switch on a light ?
Solution :
Electrons.

Question 4:
Which particles constitute the electric current in a metallic conductor ?
Solution :
Electrons.

Question 5:
(a) In which direction does conventional current flow around a circuit ?
(b) In which direction do electrons flow ?
Solution :
(a) Conventional current flows from positive terminal of a battery to the negative terminal,
through the outer circuit.
(b) Electrons flow from negative terminal to positive terminal of the battery (opposite to the
direction of conventional current).

Question 6:
Which of the following equation shows the correct relationship between electrical units ?
1 A = 1 C/s or 1 C = 1 A/s
Solution :
1A = 1C/s

Question 7:
What is the unit of electric current ?
Solution :
Ampere.

Question 8:
(a) How many milliamperes are there in 1 ampere ?
(b) How many microamperes are there in 1 ampere ?
Solution :
(a) 1 amp = 103 milli amp.
(b) 1 amp = 106 micro amp.

Question 9:
Which of the two is connected in series : ammeter or voltmeter ?
Solution :
Ammeter is connected in series.



Question 10:
Compare how an ammeter and a voltmeter are connected in a circuit.
Solution :
Ammeter is connected in series in a circuit whereas voltmeter is connected in parallel.

Question 11:
What do the following symbols mean in circuit diagrams ?

Solution :
(i) Variable resistance.
(ii) A closed plug key.

Question 12:
If 20 C of charge pass a point in a circuit in 1 s, what current is flowing ?
Solution :
Given, Q = 20 C, t=1s
I=?
We know that:
I=Q/t.
I=20/1=20A.

Question 13:
A current of 4 A flows around a circuit for 10 s. How much charge flows past a point in the
circuit in this time ?
Solution :
Given, I=4amp, C, t=10s Q=?
We know that:
I=Q/t.
Q=4*10=40C.

Question 14:
What is the current in a circuit if the charge passing each point is 20 C in 40 s ?
Solution :
Given, Q = 20 C, t=1s
I=?
We know that:
I=Q/t.
Thus I=20/40=0.5A.

Question 15:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) A current is a flow of……….. For this to happen there must be a………….
(b) Current is measured in……… using an………… placed in……… in a circuit.
Solution :
(a) electrons; closed
(b) amperes; ammeter; series.

Question 16:
(a) Name a device which helps to maintain potential difference across a conductor (say, a
bulb).
If a potential difference of 10 V causes a current of 2 A to flow for 1 minute, how much energy



is
transferred ?
Solution :
(a) Cell or battery helps to maintain potential difference across a conductor.
(b) Given: p.d. = 10 V, I = 2amp, t = 1 min = 60s.
We know that:
I=Q/t.
Thus, Q=Ixt.
Q=2×60.
Q=120 C.
Work done = p.d. x charge moved
Work done = 120x10J
Work done = 1200J.

Question 17:
(a) What is an electric current ? What makes an electric current flow in a wire ?
(b) Define the unit of electric current (or Define ampere).
Solution :
(a) An electric currrent is a flow of electric charges (electrons) through a conductor.
Potential difference between the ends of the wire makes electric current to flow in the wire.
(b) When 1 coulomb of charge flows through any cross-section of a conductor in 1 second, the
electric current flowing through it is said to be 1 ampere.

Question 18:
What is an ammeter ? How is it connected in a circuit ? Draw a diagram to illustrate your
answer.
Solution :
Ammeter is a device used for the measurement of electric current. It is always connected in
series with the circuit in which the current is to be measured.

Question 19:
(a) Write down the formula which relates electric charge, time and electric current.
(b) A radio set draws a current of 0.36 A for 15 minutes. Calculate the amount of electric
charge that flows through the circuit.
Solution :
(a). Work done = Potential difference x charge moved.
(b). I=0.36A, t=15min =900seconds.
Q=Ixt
=0.36×900
=324C.

Question 20:
Why should the resistance of :
(a) an ammeter be very small ?
(b) a voltmeter be very large ?



Solution :
(a) The resistance of an ammeter should be very small so that it may not change the value of
the current flowing in the circuit.
(b) The resistance of a voltmeter should be very large so that it takes a negligible current from
the current.

Question 21:
Draw circuit symbols for (a) fixed resistance (b) variable resistance (c) a cell (d) a battery of
three cells (e) an open switch (f) a closed switch.
Solution :

Question 22:
What is a circuit diagram ? Draw the labelled diagram of an electric circuit comprising of a cell,
a resistor, an ammeter, a voltmeter and a closed switch (or closed plug key). Which of the two
has a large resistance : an ammeter or a voltmeter ?
Solution :
A diagram which indicates how different components in a circuit have been connected by
using the electrical symbols for the components is called a circuit diagram.



A voltmeter has a large resistance.

Question 23:
If the charge on an electron is 1.6 x 10-19 coulombs, how many electrons should pass through
a conductor in 1 second to constitute 1 ampere current ?
Solution :

Question 24:
The p.d. across a lamp is 12 V. How many joules of electrical energy are changed into heat
and light when :
(a) a charge of 1 C passes through it ?
(b) a charge of 5 C passes through it ?
(c) a current of 2 A flows through it for 10 s ?
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:12

Question 25:
In 10 s, a charge of 25 C leaves a battery, and 200 j of energy are delivered to an outside circuit
as a result.
(a) What is the p.d. across the battery ?
(b) What current flows from the battery ?
Solution :



Question 26:
(a) Define electric current. What is the SI unit of electric current.
(b) One coulomb of charge flows through any cross-section of a conductor in 1 second. What
is the current flowing through the conductor ?
(c) Which instrument is used to measure electric current ? How should it be connected in a
circuit ?
(d) What is the conventional direction of the flow of electric current ? How does it differ from
the direction of flow of electrons ?
(e) A flash of lightning carries 10 C of charge which flows for 0.01 s. What is the current ? If the
voltage is 10 MV, what is the energy ?
Solution :
(a) Electric current is the flow of electric charges (electrons) in a conductor such as a metal
wire.
SI unit of electric current is ampere.
(b) 1 ampere.
(c) An ammeter is used to measure electric current. It should be connected in series with the
circuit.
(d) Conventional direction of flow of electric current is from positive terminal of a battery to the
negative terminal, through the outer circuit. The direction of flow of electrons is opposite to the
direction of conventional current, i.e. from negative terminal to positive terminal.

Question 32:
A student made an electric circuit shown here to measure the current through two lamps.
(a) Are the lamps in series or parallel ?
(b) The student has made a mistake in this circuit.
What is the mistake ?
(c) Draw a circuit diagram to show the correct way to connect the circuit.
Use the proper circuit symbols in your diagram.

Solution :
(a) Lamps are in series.
(b) Student has connected ammeter in parallel with lamps. It should be connected in series.
(c)



Question 33:
Draw a circuit diagram to show how 3 bulbs can be lit from a battery so that 2 bulbs are
controlled by the same switch while the third bulb has its own switch.
Solution :

Question 34:
An electric heater is connected to the 230 V mains supply. A current of 8 A flows through the
heater.
(a) How much charge flows around the circuit each second ?
(b) How much energy is transferred to the heater each second ?
Solution :

Question 35:
How many electrons are flowing per second past a point in a circuit in which there is a current
of 5 amp ?
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:18

Question 1:
Name the law which relates the current in a conductor to the potential difference across its
ends.



Solution :
Ohm’s law

Question 2:
Name the unit of electrical resistance and give its symbol.
Solution :

Question 3:
Name the physical quantity whose unit is “ohm”.
Solution :
Electric resistance.

Question 4:
What is the general name of the substances having infinitely high electrical resistance ?
Solution :
Insulators.

Question 5:
Keeping the resistance constant, the potential difference applied across the ends of a
component is halved. By how much does the current change ?
Solution :

Question 6:
State the factors on which the strength of electric current flowing in a given conductor
depends.
Solution :
Strength of electric current flowing in a given conductor depends on
(i) potential difference across the ends of the conductor
(ii) resistance of the conductor.

Question 7:
Which has less electrical resistance : a thin wire or a thick wire (of the same length and same
material) ?
Solution :
Thick wire.

Question 8:
Keeping the potential difference constant, the resistance of a circuit is halved. By how much
does the current change ?
Solution :

Question 9:
A potential difference of 20 volts is applied across the ends of a resistance of 5 ohms. What



current will flow in the resistance ?
Solution :
Potential difference, V = 20V
Resistance, R = 5ohms
Current, I = ?
We know that
V=IR
20 = I x 5
I = 20/5 = 4 A

Question 10:
A resistance of 20 ohms has a current of 2 amperes flowing in it. What potential difference is
there between its ends ?
Solution :
R = 20ohms
I = 2amp
We know that
V = IR
Thus,
V = 2 x 20
V = 40V

Question 11:
A current of 5 amperes flows through a wire whose ends are at a potential difference of 3
volts. Calculate the resistance of the wire.
Solution :
I = 5amp
p.d., V = 3V
We know that
V=IR
Thus,
3 = 5 x R
R = 3/5 = 0.6 ohm

Question 12:
Fill in the following blank with a suitable word :
Ohm’s law states a relation between potential difference and……………………
Solution :
current.

Question 13:
Distinguish between good conductors, resistors and insulators. Name two good conductors,
two resistors and two insulators.
Solution :
Those substances which have very low electrical resistance are called as good conductors.
E.g., copper and aluminium.
Those substances which have comparatively high resistance than conductors are known as
resistors. E.g., nichrome and manganin.
Those substances which have infinitely high electrical resistance are called insulators. E.g.,
rubber and wood.

Question 14:



Classify the following into good conductors, resistors and insulators :
Rubber, Mercury, Nichrome, Polythene, Aluminium, Wood, Manganin, Bakelite, Iron, Paper,
Thermocol, Metal coin
Solution :
Conductor :- mercury, aluminum, iron, metal coin
Resistor :- manganin, nichrome
Insulator :- rubber, polythene, wood, bakelite, paper, thermocol

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:19

Question 15:
What is Ohm’s law ? Explain how it is used to define the unit of resistance.
Solution :
Ohm’s law gives a relationship between current (I) and potential difference (V). According to
ohm’s law: At constant temperature, the current flowing through a conductor is directly
proportional to the potential difference across its ends.
If I is the current flowing through a conductor and V is the p.d. across its ends, then according
to the ohm’s law:

Question 16:
(a) What is meant by the “resistance of a conductor” ? Write the relation between resistance,
potential
difference and current.
(b) When a 12 V battery is connected across an unknown resistor, there is a current of 2.5 mA
in the circuit. Calculate the value of the resistance of the resistor.
Solution :
(a) The property of a conductor due to which it opposes the flow of current through it is called
resistance of the conductor.
Work done = Potential difference x charge moved.
(b) V = 12volt, I=2.5 x 10-3 A
We know that
V=IR
R=V/I
R=12/(2.5X10-3)
R=4.8X103ohm = 4800 ohm.

Question 17:
(a) Define the unit of resistance (or Define the unit “ohm”).
What happens to the resistance as the conductor is made thinner ?
Keeping the potential difference constant, the resistance of a circuit is doubled. By how much
does the current change ?
Solution :



(a) 1 ohm is the resistance of a conductor such that when a potential difference of 1 volt is
applied to its ends, a current of 1ampere flows through it.
(b) Its resistance will increase.
(c)

Question 18:
(a) Why do electricians wear rubber hand gloves while working with electricity ?
(b) What p.d. is needed to send a current of 6 A through an electrical appliance having a
resistance of 40 Ω ?
Solution :
(a) Electricians wear rubber hand gloves while working with electricity because rubber is an
insulator and protects them from electric shocks.
(b) I=6amp, R=40ohm
We know that
V=IR
V = 6 x 40 = 240 V.

Question 19:
An electric circuit consisting of a 0.5 m long nichrome wire XY, an ammeter, a voltmeter, four
cells of 1.5 V each and a plug key was set up.
(i) Draw a diagram of this electric circuit to study the relation between the potential difference
maintained between the points ‘X’ and ‘Y’ and the electric current flowing through XY.
(ii) Following graph was plotted between V and I values :

What would be the values of  ratios when the potential difference is 0.8 V, 1.2 V and 1.6 V
respectively ? What conclusion do you draw from these values ?
(iii) What is the resistance of the wire ?
Solution :



Question 20:
(a) What is the ratio of potential difference and current known as ?
(b) The values of potential difference V applied across a resistor and the corresponding values
of current I
flowing in the resistor are given below :

(c) Name the law which is illustrated by the above V-I graph.
(d) Write down the formula which states the relation between potential difference, current and
resistance,
(e) The potential difference between the terminals of an electric iron is 240 V and the current is
5.0 A. What is the resistance of the electric iron ?
Solution :
(a) The ratio of potential difference and current is known as resistance.
(c) Ohm’s law
(d) Potential difference = Current x Resistane
(e) V = 240 volt, I = 5amp
We know that
V=IR
240 = 5 x R
R = 240/5 = 48 ohm.
PAGE 30:

Question 30:
An electric room heater draws a current of 2.4 A from the 120 V supply line. What current will
this room heater draw when connected to 240 V supply line ?
Solution :
In first case,
I = 2.4 amp, V = 120 volt
V=IR
120 = 2.4 x R
R = 120/2.4 = 50 ohm
In second case,
V = 240 volt, R = 50 ohm
V = IR



240 = I x 50
I =4.8 amp.

Question 31:
Name the electrical property of a material whose symbol is “omega”.
Solution :
Resistance.

Question 32:
The graph between V and 1 for a conductor is a straight line passing through the origin.
Which law is illustrated by such a graph ?
What should remain constant in a statement of this law ?
Solution :
(a) Ohm’s law
(b) Temperature.

Question 33:
A p.d. of 10 V is needed to make a current of 0.02 A flow through a wire. What p.d. is needed to
make a current of 250 mA flow through the same wire ?
Solution :
In first case,
I = 0.02 amp, V = 10 volt
V=IR
10 = 0.02 x R
R = 10/0.02 = 500 ohm
In second case,
I = 250 x 10-3 amp, R = 500 ohm
V = IR
V = 250 x 10-3 x 500
V = 125 volt.

Question 34:
A current of 200 mA flows through a 4 kΩ resistor. What is the p.d. across the resistor ?
Solution :
I = 200mA = 0.2 A
R = 4 x 103ohm = 4000 ohm
We know that
V=IR
V = 0.2 x 4000
V = 800 volt.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:26

Question 1:
What happens to the resistance as the conductor is made thicker ?
Solution :
The resistance decreases.

Question 2:
If the length of a wire is doubled by taking more of wire, what happens to its resistance ?
Solution :
Resistance also gets doubled.



Question 3:
On what factors does the resistance of a conductor depend ?
Solution :
Resistance of a conductor depends on the following factors:-
Length of the conductor, area of cross section of the conductor, nature of material of the
conductor and temperature of the conductor.

Question 4:
Name the material which is the best conductor of electricity.
Solution :
Silver metal.

Question 5:
Which among iron and mercury is a better conductor of electricity ?
Solution :
Iron.

Question 6:
Why are copper and aluminium wires usually used for electricity transmission ?
Solution :
Because copper and aluminium have very low resistivities.

Question 7:
Name the material which is used for making the heating element of an electric iron.
Solution :
Nichrome.

Question 8:
What is nichrome ? State its one use.
Solution :
Nichrome is an alloy of nickel, chromium, manganese ad iron having a resistivity of about 60
times more than that of copper. It is used for making the heating elements of electrical
heating appliances.

Question 9:
Give two reasons why nichrome alloy is used for making the heating elements of electrical
appliances.
Solution :
Nichrome alloy is used for making the heating elements of electrical appliances because:
(i) nichrome has very high resistivity
(ii) nichrome does not undergo oxidation (or burn) easily even at high temperature.

Question 10:
Why are the coils of electric irons and electric toasters made of an alloy rather than a pure
metal ?
Solution :
Because
(i) resistivity of an alloy is much higher than that of a pure metal
(ii) an alloy does not undergo oxidation (or burn) easily even at high temperature.

Question 11:
Which has more resistance :



(a) a long piece of nichrome wire or a short one ?
(b) a thick piece of nichrome wire or a thin piece ?
Solution :
(a) A long piece of nichrome wire.
(b) A thin piece of nichrome wire.

Question 12:
(a) How does the resistance of a pure metal change if its temperature decreases ?
(b) How does the presence of impurities in a metal affect its resistance ?
Solution :
(a) On decreasing the temperature, the resistance decreases.
(b) Presence of impurities in a metal increases the resistance.

Question 13:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
Resistance is measured in…………….. The resistance of a wire increases as the length………………….
; as the
temperature………. ; and as the cross-sectional area…………
Solution :
Ohms; increases; increases; decreases.

Question 14:
(a) What do you understand by the “resistivity” of a substance ?
A wire is 1.0 m long, 0.2 mm in diameter and has a resistance of 10 Ω. Calculate the resistivity
of its material ?
Solution :
(a) Resistivity is the characteristic property of a substance which depends on the nature of the
substance and its temperature. It is numerically equal to the resistance between the opposite
faces of a 1 m cube of the substance.
(b) l = 1m
r = d/2 = 0.2/2 mm = 0.1 mm = 0.0001m,
R = 10 ohm
We know that,

Question 15:
(a) Write down an expression for the resistance of a metallic wire in terms of the resistivity.
What will be the resistance of a metal wire of length 2 metres and area of cross-section 1.55 ×
10-6 m2, if the resistivity of the metal be 2.8 × 10-8 Ωm ?
Solution :



Question 16:
(a) Give two examples of substances which are good conductors of electricity. Why do you
think they are
good conductors of electricity ?
Calculate the resistance of a copper wire 1.0 km long and 0.50 mm diameter if the resistivity of
copper is 1.7 × 10-8 Ωm.
Solution :
(a) Silver and copper are good conductors of electricity because they have free electrons
available for conduction.

Question 17:
Will current flow more easily through a thick wire or a thin wire of the same material when
connected to the same source ? Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
Current will flow more easily through thick wire because the resistance of the thick wire will be
lesser than that of thin wire.

Question 18:
How does the resistance of a conductor depend on :
(a) length of the conductor ?
(b) area of cross-section of the conductor ?
(c) temperature of the conductor ?
Solution :
(a) Resistance of a conductor increases (or decreases) with increase (or decrease) in the
length of the conductor.
(b) Resistance of a conductor decreases (increases) with increase (decrease) in the area of
cross-section of the conductor.
(c) Resistance of a conductor increases on raising the temperature and decreases on lowering
the temperature.

Question 19:
(a) Give one example to show how the resistance depends on the nature of material of the
conductor.
(b) Calculate the resistance of an aluminium cable of length 10 km and diameter 2.0 mm if the
resistivity of aluminium is 2.7 x 10-8Ωm.
Solution :
(a) If we take two similar wires of same length and same diameter, one of copper metal and
other of nichrome alloy, we will find that the resistance of nichrome wire is about 60 times
more than that of the copper wire. This shows that the resistance depends on the nature of
material of the conductor.



Question 20:
What would be the effect on the resistance of a metal wire of :
(a) increasing its length ?
(b) increasing its diameter ?
(c) increasing its temperature ?
Solution :
(a) Resistance will increase.
(b) Resistance will decrease.
(c) Resistance will increase.

Question 21:
How does the resistance of a wire vary with its :
(a) area of cross-section ?
(b) diameter ?
Solution :
(a) By increasing the area of cross section, the resistance will decrease.
(b) By increasing the diameter, the resistance will decrease.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:27

Question 22:
How does the resistance of a wire change when :
(i) its length is tripled ?
(ii) its diameter is tripled ?
(in) its material is changed to one whose resistivity is three times ?
Solution :



Question 23:
Calculate the area of cross-section of a wire if its length is 1.0 m, its resistance is 23 Ω and the
resistivity of the material of the wire is 1.84 x 10-6 Ωm.
Solution :

Question 24:
(a) Define resistivity. Write an expression for the resistivity of a substance. Give the meaning of
each symbol
which occurs in it.
(b) State the SI unit of resistivity.
(c) Distinguish between resistance and resistivity.
(d) Name two factors on which the resistivity of a substance depends and two factors on
which it does not depend.
(e) The resistance of a metal wire of length 1 m is 26 Ω at 20°C. If the diameter of the wire is
0.3 mm, what will be the resistivity of the metal at that temperature ?
Solution :



Question 33:
A piece of wire of resistance 20 Ω is drawn out so that its length is increased to twice its
original length. Calculate the resistance of the wire in the new situation.
Solution :

Question 34:
The electrical resistivities of three materials P, Q and R are given below :

Which material will you use for making (a) electric wires (b) handle for soldering iron, and (c)
solar cells ? Give reasons for your choices.
Solution :
(a) Material Q with resistivity 2.63 X 10-8 ohm-m can be used for making electric wires
because it has very low resistivity.
(b) Material R with resistivity 1.0 X 1015 ohm-m can be used for making handle of soldering
iron because it has very high resistivity.
(c) Material P with resistivity 2.3 X 103 ohm-m can be used for making solar cell because it is a
semiconductor.

Question 35:
The electrical resistivities of four materials A, B, C and D are given below :



Which material is : (a) good conductor (b) resistor (c) insulator, and (d) semiconductor ?
Solution :
(a) Good conductor = C (10 x 10-8ohm-m)
(b) Resistor = A (110 x 10-8 ohm-m)
(c) Insulator= B (1 x 1010 ohm-m)
(d) Semiconductor= D (2.3 x 103 ohm-m)

Question 36:
The electrical resistivities of five substances A, B, C, D and E are given below :
A 5.20 x l0-8 Ω m
Solution :
(a) E is best conductor of electricity due to its least electrical resistivity.
(b) C, because its resistivity is lesser than that of A.
(c) B, because it has the highest electrical resistivity.
(d) C and E, because of their low electrical resistivities.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:37

Question 1:
Give the law of combination of resistances in series.
Solution :
According to the law of combination of resistances in series, the combined resistance of any
number of resistances connected in series is equal to the sum of the individual resistances.

Question 2:
If five resistances, each of value 0.2 ohm, are connected in series, what will be the resultant
resistance ?
Solution :
As per the law of combination of resistances in series,
R=R1+ R2+ R3+ R4+ R5
R=0.2+0.2+0.2+0.2+0.2=1ohm.

Question 3:
State the law of combination of resistances in parallel.
Solution :
According to the law of combination of resistance in parallel, the reciprocal of the combined
resistance of a number of resistances connected in parallel is equal to the sum of the
reciprocals of all the individual resistances.

Question 4:
If 3 resistances of 3 ohm each are connected in parallel, what will be their total resistance ?
Solution :



Question 5:
How should the two resistances of 2 ohms each be connencted so as to produce an
equivalent resistance of 1 ohm ?
Solution :
Since the resultant resistance is less than the individual resistances, so the resistances should
be connected in parallel.

Question 6:
Two resistances X and Y are connected turn by turn : (i) in parallel, and (ii) in series. In which
case the resultant resistance will be less than either of the individual resistances ?
Solution :
In case of parallel combination, the resultant resistance will be less than either of the individual
resistances.

Question 7:
What possible values of resultant resistance one can get by combining two resistances, one of
value 2 ohm and the other 6 ohm ?
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:38

Question 8:
Show how you would connect two 4 ohm resistors to produce a combined resistance of
(a) 2 ohms
(b) 8 ohms.
Solution :
(a) By connecting in parallel: Since equivalent resistance will be
1/ R = 1/4 + 1/4 = 2/4 = 1/2
Therefore, R = 2 ohm
(b) By connecting in series : Since equivalent resistance will be
R = 4 ohm + 4 ohm = 8 ohm.

Question 9:
Which of the following resistor arrangement, A or B, has the lower combined resistance ?

Solution :
Resistance of arrangement A is 10 ohm.
Combined resistance of arrangement B is caculated as follows:



1/R = 1/10 + 1/1000 = (100+1)/1000
R = 1000/101 = 9.9 ohm
Therefore, arrangement B has lower combined resistance.

Question 10:
A wire that has resistance R is cut into two equal pieces. The two parts are joined in parallel.
What is the resistance of the combination ?
Solution :
Resistance of each part is R/2.
Resultant resistance R’ is given by
1/R’ = 2/R+2/R
R’=R/4.

Question 11:
Calculate the combined resistance in each case :

Solution :

Question 12:
Find the current in each resistor in the circuit shown below :

Solution :



Question 13:
Explain with diagrams what is meant by the “series combination” and “parallel combination” of
resistances. In which case the resultant resistance is : (i) less, and (ii) more, than either of the
individual resistances ?
Solution :

Question 14:
A battery of 9 V is connected in series with resistors of 0.2 Ω, 0.3 Ω, 0.4 Ω, 0.5 Ω and 12 Ω.
How much current would flow through the 12 Ω resistor ?
Solution :

Question 15:
An electric bulb of resistance 20 Ω and a resistance wire of 4 Ω are connected in series with a
6 V battery. Draw the circuit diagram and calculate :
(a) total resistance of the circuit.
(b) current through the circuit.
(c) potential difference across the electric bulb.
(d) potential difference across the resistance wire.
Solution :



Question 16:
Three resistors are connected as shown in the diagram.

Through the resistor 5 ohm, a current of 1 ampere is flowing,
(i) What is the current through the other two resistors ?
(ii) What is the p.d. across AB and across AC ?
(iii) What is the total resistance ?
Solution :

Question 17:
For the circuit shown in the diagram below :



What is the value of :
(i) current through 6 Ωresistor ?
(ii) potential difference across 12 Ω resistor ?
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:39

Question 18:
Two resistors, with resistances 5 Ω and 10 Ω respectively are to be connected to a battery of
emf 6 V so as to obtain :
(i) minimum current flowing (ii) maximum current flowing
(a) How will you connect the resistances in each case ? .
(b) Calculate the strength of the total current in the circuit in the two cases.
Solution :
Given: Two resistors with resistances R1=5ohm and R2=10ohm, V=6volt
(a) For minimum current these two should be connected in series. For maximum current these
two should be connected in parallel.
(b)In series,
Total resistance = 5+10 = 15ohms
Therefore total current drawn = V/R = 6/15 = 0.4amps
In parallel,
Total resistance R is given as
1/R=1/R1+1/R2
1/R=1/5+1/10
1/R=3/10
R=10/3ohm
Therefore total current drawn by the circuit = V/R = 6/(10/3) =1.8amps.

Question 19:
The circuit diagram given below shows the combination of three resistors R1 R2 and R3 :



Find : (i) total resistance of the circuit.
(ii) total current flowing in the circuit.
(iii) the potential difference across R1.
Solution :
(i) Total resistance of two resistors that are connected in parallel is
1/R’ = 1/3+1/6
1/R’ = 3/6
R’ = 2ohms
Total resistance of the circuit = 2+4ohms = 6ohms
(ii) Total current flowing through the circuit=V/total resistance
I = 12/6 = 2amps
(iii) Potential difference across R1=R1 x I = 4 x 2 = 8V.

Question 20:
In the circuit diagram given below, the current flowing across 5 ohm resistor is 1 amp. Find the
current flowing through the other two resistors.

Solution :
Given :-
1 amp current is flowing through 5ohm resistor.
We know that in case of parallel connection, the p.d. across each resistor is same and is equal
to the voltage applied.
Therefore, applied voltage, V = IR = 1 x 5 = 5V
So,
Current through 4 ohm resistor = V/R = 5/4 = 1.25 A
Current through 10 ohm resistor = V/R = 5/10 = 0.5 A

Question 21:
A resistor has a resistance of 176 ohms. How many of these resistors should be connected in
parallel so that their combination draws a current of 5 amperes from a 220 volt supply line ?
Solution :



Question 22:
An electric heater which is connected to a 220 V supply line has two resistance coils A and B
of 24 Ω resistance each. These coils can be used separately (one at a time), in series or in
parallel. Calculate the current drawn when :
(a) only one coil A is used.
(b) coils A and B are used in series.
(c) coils A and B are used in parallel.
Solution :

Question 23:
In the circuit diagram given below five resistances of 10 Ω, 40 Ω, 30 Ω, 20 Ω and 60 Ω are
connected as shown to a 12 V battery.

Calculate :
(a) total resistance in the circuit.



(b) total current flowing in the circuit.
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:40

Question 24:
In the circuit diagram given below, three resistors R1, R2, and R3 of 5 Ω, 10 Ω and 30 Ω,
respectively are connected as shown.

Calculate :
(a) current through each resistor.
(b) total current in the circuit.
(c) total resistance in the circuit.
Solution :



Question 25:
A p.d. of 4 V is applied to two resistors of 6 Ω and 2 Ω connected in series. Calculate :
(a) the combined resistance
(b) the current flowing
(c) the p.d. across the 6 Ω resistor
Solution :

Question 26:
A p.d. of 6 V is applied to two resistors of 3 Ω and 6 Ω connected in parallel. Calculate :
(a) the combined resistance
(b) the current flowing in the main circuit
(c) the current flowing in the 3 Ω resistor.
Solution :



Question 27:
In the circuit shown below, the voltmeter reads 10 V.

(a) What is the combined resistance ?
(b) What current flows ?
(c) What is the p.d. across 2 Ω resistor ?
(d) What is the p.d. across 3 Ω resistor ?
Solution :

Question 28:
In the circuit given below :

(a) What is the combined resistance ?
(b) What is the p.d. across the combined resistance ?
(c) What is the p.d. across the 3 Ω resistor ?
(d) What is the current in the 3 Ω resistor ?
(e) What is the current in the 6 Ω resistor ?
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:41



Question 29:
A 5 V battery is connected to two 20 Ω resistors which are joined together in series.
(a) Draw a circuit diagram to represent this. Add an arrow to indicate the direction of
conventional current flow in the circuit.
(b) What is the effective resistance of the two resistors ?
(c) Calculate the current that flows from the battery.
(d) What is the p.d. across each resistor ?
Solution :

Question 30:
The figure given below shows an electric circuit in which current flows from a 6 V battery
through two resistors.
(a) Are the resistors connected in series with each other or in parallel ?
(b) For each resistor, state the p.d. across it.
(c) The current flowing from the battery is shared between the two resistors. Which resistor
will have bigger share of the current ?
(d) Calculate the effective resistance of the two resistors.
(e) Calculate the current that flows from the battery.

Solution :

Question 31:
A 4 Ω coil and a 2 Ω coil are connected in parallel. What is their combined resistance ? A total
current of 3 A passes through the coils. What current passes through the 2 Ω coil ?
Solution :



Question 32:
(a) With the help of a circuit diagram, deduce the equivalent resistance of two resistances
connected in series.
(b) Two resistances are connected in series as shown in the diagram :

(i) What is the current through the 5 ohm resistance ?
(ii) What is the current through R ?
(iii) What is the value of R ?
(iv) What is the value of V ?
Solution :



Question 33:
(a) With the help of a diagram, derive the formula for the resultant resistance of three resistors
connected in series.
(b) For the circuit shown in the diagram given below :

Calculate :
(i) the value of current through each resistor.
(ii) the total current in the circuit.
(iii) the total effective resistance of the circuit.
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:42

Question 34:
(a) With the help of a circuit diagram, obtain the relation for the equivalent resistance of two
resistances connected in parallel.
In the circuit diagram shown below, find :
(i) Total resistance.
(ii) Current shown by the ammeter A

Solution :



Question 35:
(a) Explain with the help of a labelled circuit diagram, how you will find the resistance of a
combination of three resistors of resistances R1, R2 and R3 joined in parallel.
(b) In the diagram shown below, the cell and the ammeter both have negligible resistance. The
resistors are identical.

With the switch K open, the ammeter reads 0.6 A. What will be the ammeter reading when the
switch is closed ?
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:43

Question 43:
Show with the help of diagrams, how you would connect three resistors each of resistance 6
Ω, so that the combination has resistance of (i) 9 Ω (ii) 4 Ω.
Solution :



Question 44:
Two resistances when connected in parallel give resultant value of 2 ohm; when connected in
series the value becomes 9 ohm. Calculate the value of each resistance.
Solution :

Question 45:
A resistor of 8 ohms is connected in parallel with another resistor X. The resultant resistance
of the combination is 4.8 ohms. What is the value of the resistor X ?
Solution :



Question 46:
You are given three resistances of 1,2 and 3 ohms. Show by diagrams, how with the help of
these resistances you can get:

(i) 6 Ω (ii)  Ω (iii) 1.5 Ω
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:44

Question 47:
How will you connect three resistors of 2 Ω, 3 Ω and 5 Ω respectively so as to obtain a
resultant resistance of
2.5 Ω ? Draw the diagram to show the arrangement.
Solution :

Question 48:
How will you connect three resistors of resistances 2 Ω, 3 Ω and 6Ω obtain a total n si stance
of: (a) 4 Ω., and (b) 1Ω?
Solution :

Question 49:
What is (a) highest, and (b) lowest, resistance which can be obtained by combining Com
resistors having the following resistances ?
4 Ω, 8 Ω, 12 Ω, 24 Ω
Solution :



Question 50:
What is the resistance between A and B in the figure given below ?

Solution :

Question 51:
You are given one hundred 1 Ω resister. What is the smallest and largest resistance you can
make in a circuit using these ?
Solution :

Question 52:
You are supplied with a number of 100 Ω How could you combine some of these resisters to
make a 250 Ω resistor ?
Solution :

Question 53:
The resistors R1, R2, R3 and R4 in the figure given below are all equal in value.



What would you expect the voltmeters A, B and C to read assuming that the connecting wires
in the circuit have negligible resistance ?
Solution :

Question 54:
Four resistances of 16 ohms each are connected in parallel. Four such combinations are
connected in series.
What is the total resistance ?
Solution :

Question 55:
If the lamps are both the same in the figure given below and if A1, reads 0.50 A, what do A2, A3,
A4 and A5 read ?

Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:47

Question 1:
Are the lights in your house wired in series ?
Solution :
No, they are wired in parallel.

Question 2:



What happens to the other bulbs in a series circuit if one bulb blows off ?
Solution :
All the other bulbs also stop glowing.

Question 3:
What happens to the other bulbs in a parallel circuit if one bulb blows off ?
Solution :
All the other bulbs keep glowing.

Question 4:
Which type of circuit, series or parallel, is preferred while connecting a large number of bulbs :
(a) for decorating a hotel building from outside ?
(b) for lighting inside the rooms of the hotel ?
Solution :
(a) Series
(b) Parallel

Question 5:
Draw a circuit diagram to show how two 4 V electric lamps can be lit brightly from two 2 V
cells.
Solution :
The two lamps (of 4V each) should be arranged in parallel with the two 2V cells.

Question 6:
Why is a series arrangement not used for connecting domestic electrical appliances in a
circuit ?
Solution :
A series arrangement is not used for connecting domestic electrical appliances in a circuit
because if one electrical appliance stops working due to some defect, then all other appliance
also stop working as the whole circuit is broken.

Question 7:
Give three reasons why different electrical appliances in a domestic circuit are connected in
parallel.
Solution :
Different electrical appliances in a domestic circuit are connected in parallel because of the
following advantages:
(i) If one electrical appliance stops working due to some defect, then all other appliances keep
working properly.
(ii) Each electrical appliance has its own switch due to which it can be turned on or turned off
independently, without affecting other appliances.
(iii) Each electrical appliance gets the same voltage as that of the power supply line.

Question 8:
Ten bulbs are connected in a series circuit to a power supply line. Ten identical bulbs are
connected in a



(a) parallel circuit to an identical power supply line.
(b) Which circuit would have the highest voltage across each bulb ?
(c) In which circuit would the bulbs be brighter ?
(d) In which circuit, if one bulb blows out, all others will stop glowing ?
(e) Which circuit would have less current in it ?
Solution :
(a) Parallel circuit
(b) Parallel circuit
(c) Series circuit
(d) Series circuit.

Question 9:
Consider the circuits given below :

(a) In which circuit are the lamps dimmest ?
(b) In which circuit or circuits are the lamps of equal brightness to the lamps in circuit (/) ?
(c) Which circuit gives out the maximum light ?
Solution :
(a) circuit (ii)
(b) circuit (iii)
(c) circuit (iii)

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:48

Question 10:
If you were going to connect two light bulbs to one battery, would you use a series or a parallel
arrangement ? Why ? Which arrangement takes more current from the battery ?
Solution :
Parallel arrangement because if one electrical bulb stops glowing due to some defect the
other will keep glowing.
Parallel arrangement takes more current from the battery due to its lesser equivalent
resistance.

Question 11:
(a) Which is the better way to connect lights and other electrical appliances in domestic wiring
: series circuits or parallel circuits ? Why ?
(b) Christmas tree lamps are usually wired in series. What happens if one lamp breaks ?
(c) An electrician has wired a house in such a way that if a lamp gets fused in one room of the
house, all the lamps in other rooms of the house stop working. What is the defect in the wiring
?
(d) Draw a circuit diagram showing two electric lamps connected in parallel together with a cell

and a switch that works both lamps. Mark an  on your diagram to show where an
ammeter should be placed to measure the current.
Solution :
(a) Parallel circuits – Because if one electrical appliance stops working due to some defect,
then all other appliances in the circuit will keep working properly.



(b) All the other lamps stop glowing.
(c) All lamps are connected in series.
(d)

Question 14:
(a) Draw a circuit diagram showing two lamps, one cell and a switch connected in series.
(b) How can you change the brightness of the lamps ?
Solution :

(a) 
(b) The brightness of the lamps can be changed by connecting the lamps in parallel.

Question 15:
Consider the circuit given below where A, B and C are three identical light bulbs of constant
resistance.

(a) List the bulbs in order of increasing brightness.
(b) If C burns out, what will be the brightness of A now compared with before ?
(c) If B burns out instead, what will be the brightness of A and C compared with before ?
Solution :
(a) C will be the brightest. Voltage will be distributed equally between A and B, so they will have
equal brightness but lesser than that of C.
(b) A gets the same voltage as before, so its brightness remains the same.
(c) If B burns put, A will also stop glowing because it is connected in series with B. However,
brightness of C remains the same.

Question 16:
How do you think the brightness of two lamps arranged in parallel compares with the
brightness of two lamps arranged in series (both arrangements having one cell) ?
Solution :
The brightness of two lamps arranged in parallel is much more those arranged in series.

Question 17:
If current flows through two lamps arranged :
(a) in series,
(b) in parallel,
and the filament of one lamps breaks, what happens to the other lamp ? Explain your answer.



Solution :
(a) In case of series connection, if filament of one lamp breaks, the other wil stop glowing.
(b) In case of parallel connection, if filament of one lamp breaks, the other will keep glowing.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:49

Question 18:
The figure below shows a variable resistor in a dimmer switch.

How would you turn the switch to make the lights : (a) brighter, and (b) dimmer ? Explain your
answer.
Solution :
(a) Turn the switch to right side so as the resistance decreases.
(b) Turn the switch to the left side so as the resistace increases.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:58

Question 1:
State two factors on which the electrical energy consumed by an electrical appliance depends.
Solution :
Electrical energy consumed by an electrical appliance depends on:
1. Power rating of the appliance.
2. Time for which the appliance is used.

Question 2:
Which one has a higher electrical resistance : a 100 watt bulb or a 60 watt bulb ?
Solution :
60 watt bulb, because power is inversely proportional to the resistance.

Question 3:
Name the commercial unit of electric energy.
Solution :
Kilowatt-hour is the commercial unit of electric energy.

Question 4:
An electric bulb is rated at 220 V, 100 W. What is its resistance ?
Solution :
V = 220 V, P = 100W
R=?
We know that
P = V2/R
Thus
R = V2/P = 2202/100 = 484ohm

Question 5:
What is the SI unit of (i) electric energy, and (ii) electric power ?



Solution :
(i) joule
(ii) watt

Question 6:
Name the quantity whose unit is (i) kilowatt, and (ii) kilowatt-hour.
Solution :
(i) Electric power
(ii) Electric energy

Question 7:
Which quantity has the unit of watt ?
Solution :
Electric power has the unit of watt.

Question 8:
What is the meaning of the symbol kWh ? Which quantity does it represent ?
Solution :
kWh is the short form of kilowatt-hour, which is the commercial unit of electrical energy.

Question 9:
If the potential difference between the end of a wire of fixed resistance is doubled, by how
much does the electric power increase ?
Solution :
P=V2/R
R is fixed.
V becomes double.
Now, P = (2V)2/R = 4 V2/R
So, the electric power becomes four times its previous value.

Question 10:
An electric lamp is labelled 12 V, 36 W. This indicates that it should be used with a 12 V
supply. What other information does the label provide ?
Solution :
Other information is that it will consume energy at the rate of 36 J/s.

Question 11:
What current will be taken by a 920 W appliance if the supply voltage is 230 V ?
Solution :
P=920W, V=230V, I=?
We know that
P = V x I,
920 = 230 x I
I = 920/230 = 4amp

Question 12:
Define watt. Write down an equation linking watts, volts and amperes.
Solution :
When an electrical appliance consumes electrical energy at the rate of 1 joule per second, its
power is said to be 1 watt.
1 watt = 1 volt x 1 ampere.



Question 13:
Define watt-hour. How many joules are equal to 1 watt-hour ?
Solution :
One watt hour is the amount of electrical energy consumed when an electrical appliance of 1
watt power is used for 1 hour.
1 watt hour = 3600 joules

Question 14:
How much energy is consumed when a current of 5 amperes flows through the filament (or
element) of a heater having resistance of 100 ohms for two hours ? Express it in joules.
Solution :
I=5amp, R=100ohms, t=2h
We know that
Electric energy consumed = P x t = I*I*Rt
= 25 x 100 x 2
= 5000 Wh
= 5 kwh
We know that 1kwh = 3.6 x 106 J
Therefore, 5kwh = 5 x 3.6 x 106 J = 18 x 106 J.

Question 15:
An electric bulb is connected to a 220 V power supply line. If the bulb draws a current of 0.5 A,
calculate the power of the bulb.
Solution :
V=220V, I=0.5amp, P=?
We know that
P=VI=220X0.5
P=110 watt.

Question 16:
In which of the following cases more electrical energy is consumed per hour ?
(i) A current of 1 ampere passed through a resistance of 300 ohms.
(ii) A current of 2 amperes passed through a resistance of 100 ohms.
Solution :

Question 17:
An electric kettle rated at 220 V, 2.2 kW, works for 3 hours. Find the energy consumed and the
current drawn.
Solution :
V=220V, P=2.2kW=2200W, t=3h
We know that
Electrical energy consumed = Pxt = 2.2×3 = 6.6 kWh
We have, P = V x I
2200 = 220 x I
I=10amp



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:59

Question 18:
In a house two 60 W electric bulbs are lighted for 4 hours, and three 100 W bulbs for 5 hours
everyday. Calculate the electric energy consumed in 30 days.
Solution :

Question 19:
A bulb is rated as 250 V; 0.4 A. Find its : (i) power, and (ii) resistance.
Solution :

Question 20:
For a heater rated at 4 kW and 220 V, calculate :
(a) the current,
(b) the resistance of the heater,
(c) the energy consumed in 2 hours, and
(d) the cost if 1 kWh is priced at ₹ 60.
Solution :



Question 21:
An electric motor takes 5 amperes current from a 220 volt supply line. Calculate the power of
the motor and electrical energy consumed by it in 2
Solution :

Question 22:
Which uses more energy : a 250 W TV set in 1 hour or a 1200 W toaster in 10 minutes ?
Solution :

Question 23:
Calculate the power used in the 2 Ω resistor in each of the following circuits :
(i) a 6 V battery in series with 1 Ω and 2 Ω resistors.
(ii) a 4 V battery in parallel with 12 Ω and 2 Ω resistors.
Solution :



Question 24:
Two lamps, one rated 40 W at 220 V and the other 60 W at 220 V, are connected in parallel to
the electric supply at 220 V.
(a) Draw a circuit diagram to show the connections.
(b) Calculate the current drawn from the electric supply.
(c) Calculate the total energy consumed by the two lamps together when they operate for one
hour.
Solution :

Question 25:
An electric kettle connected to the 230 V mains supply draws a current of 10 A. Calculate :
(a) the power of the kettle.
(b) the energy transferred in 1 minute.
Solution :

Question 26:
A 2 kW heater, a 200 W TV and three 100 W lamps are all switched on from 6m. to 10 p.m.
What is the total cost at Rs. 5.50 per kWh ?



Solution :

Question 27:
What is the maximum power in kilowatts of the appliance that can be connected safely to a 13
A ; 230 V mains socket ?
Solution :

Question 28:
An electric fan runs from the 230 V mains. The current flowing through it is 0.4 A. At what rate
is electrical energy transferred by the fan ?
Solution :

Question 29:
(a) What is meant by “electric power” ? Write the formula for electric power in terms of
potential difference and current.
(b) The diagram below shows a circuit containing a lamp L, a voltmeter and an ammeter. The
voltmeter reading is 3 V and the ammeter reading is 0.5 A

(i) What is the resistance of the lamp ?
(ii) What is the power of the lamp ?
(c) Define kilowatt-hour. How many joules are there in one kilowatt-hour ?
(d) Calculate the cost of operating a heater of 500 W for 20 hours at the rate of ? ₹ 3.90 per
unit.
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:60

Question 41:
State whether an electric heater will consume more electrical energy or less electrical energy
per second when the length of its heating element is reduced. Give reasons for your answer.
Solution :
By reducing the length of element the resistance will decrease.
Power is inversely proportional to resistance. So, this will result in more consumption of
energy.

Question 42:
The table below shows the current in three different electrical appliances when connected to
the 240 V mains supply :

(a) Which appliance has the greatest electrical resistance ? How does the data show this ?
(b) The lamp is connected to the mains supply by using a thin, twin-cored cable consisting of
live and neutral wires. State two reasons why this cable should not be used for connecting the
kettle to the mains supply.
(c) Calculate the power rating of the kettle when it is operated from the 240 V mains supply.
(d) A man takes the kettle abroad where the mains supply is 120 V. What is the current in the
kettle when it is operated from the 120 V supply ?
Solution :
(a) Lamp; because least current is flowing through it.
(b) Large current drawn by the kettle; Earth connection needed.
(c) We know that
P=VI
V=240V, I=8.5A
P=240X8.5=2040W=2.04kW



(d) When connected to 240 V supply, P=2040W
R = V2/P = 2402/240
R=28.23ohm
Now, when V=120V, R=28.23ohm
I=V/R=120/28.23=4.25A

Question 43:
A boy noted the readings on his home’s electricity meter on Sunday at 8 AM and again on
Monday at 8 AM (see figure below).

(a) What was the meter reading on Sunday ?
(b) What was the meter reading on Monday ?
(c) How many units of electricity have been used ?
(d) In how much time these units have been used ?
(e) If the rate is Rs. 5 per unit, what is the cost of electricity used during this time ?
Solution :
(a) 42919
(b) 42935
(c) 42935-42919=16 units
(d) 24 hours
(e) Cost of 1 unit = Rs. 5
Cost of 16 units = 16×5 = Rs. 80

Question 44:
An electric bulb is rated as 10 W, 220 V. How many of these bulbs can be connected in parallel
across the two wires of 220 V supply line if the maximum current which can be drawn is 5 A ?
Solution :
P=10W, V=220V, I=5A
We know that
P=VI
=220X5
P=1100W
Power of one bulb=10W
Total no. of bulbs that can be connected=1100/10=110

Question 45:
Two exactly similar electric lamps are arranged (i) in parallel, and (ii) in series. If the parallel
and series combination of lamps are connected to 220 V supply line one by one, what will be
the ratio of electric power consumed by them ?
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:66

Question 1:
How does the heat H produced by a current passing through a fixed resistance wire depend on
the magnitude of current I ?
Solution :
Heat produced is directly proportional to the square of current.

Question 2:
If the current passing through a conductor is doubled, what will be the change in heat
produced ?
Solution :
Heat produced is directly proportional to the square of current.
If current I is doubled, heat H will be four times.

Question 3:
Name two effects produced by electric current.
Solution :
Two effects of produced by electric current are:
(a) Heating effect
(b) Magnectic effect

Question 4:
Which effect of current is utilised in an electric light bulb ?
Solution :
Heating effect

Question 5:
Which effect of current is utilised in the working of an electric fuse ?
Solution :
Heating effect

Question 6:
Name two devices which work on the heating effect of electric current.
Solution :
Electirc heater and electric fuse.

Question 7:



Name two gases which are filled in filament type electric light bulbs.
Solution :
Argon and nitrogen.

Question 8:
Explain why, filament type electric bulbs are not power efficient.
Solution :
Filament type electric bulbs are not power efficien because most of the electric power
consumed by the filament of a bulb appears as heat and only a small amount of electric power
is converted into light.

Question 9:
Why does the connecting cord of an electric heater not glow hot while the heating element
does ?
Solution :
The connecting cord of the heater made of copper does not glow because negligible heat is
produced in it by passing current (because of its extremely low resistance); but the heating
element made of nichrome glows because it becomes red-hot due to the large amount of heat
produced on passing current (because of its high resistance).

Question 10:
(a) Write down the formula for the heat produced when a current I is passed through a resistor
R for time
(b) An electric iron of resistance 20 ohms draws a current of 5 amperes. Calculate the heat
produced in 30 seconds.
Solution :

Question 11:
State three factors on which the heat produced by an electric current depends. How does it
depend on these factors ?
Solution :
Heat produced by an electric current depends on the following factors:
(i) Heat produced is directly proportional to square of current.
(ii) Heat produced is directly proportional to resistance.
(iii) Heat produced is directly proportional to the time for which current flows.

Question 12:
(a) State and explain Joule’s law of heating.
(b) A resistance of 40 ohms and one of 60 ohms are arranged in series across 220 volt supply.
Find the heat in joules produced by this combination of resistances in half a minute.
Solution :



Question 13:
Why is an electric light bulb not filled with air ? Explain why argon or nitrogen is filled in an
electric bulb.
Solution :
If air is filled in an electric bulb, then the extremely hot tungsten filament would burn up quickly
in the oxygen of air. So, the electric bulb is filled with a chemically unreactive gas like argon or
nitrogen. Thes gases do not react with the hot tungsten filament and hence prolong the life of
the filament of the bulb.

Question 14:
Explain why, tungsten is used for making the filaments of electric bulbs.
Solution :
Tungsten is used for making the filaments of electric bulbs because it has a very high melting
point. Due to its very high melting point, the tungsten filament can be kept white hot without
melting away. Also, tungsten has high flexibility and low rate of evaporation at high
temperature.

Question 15:
Explain why, the current that makes the heater element very hot, only slightly warms the
connecting wires leading to the heater.
Solution :
The connecting wires of the heater get only slightly warm because they have extremely low
resistance due to which negligible heat is produced in them by passing current.

Question 16:
When a current of 4.0 A passes through a certain resistor for 10 minutes, 2.88 x 104 J of heat
are produced. Calculate :
(a) the power of the resistor.
(b) the voltage across the resistor.
Solution :



Question 17:
A heating coil has a resistance of 200 Ω. At what rate will heat be produced in it when a current
of 2.5 A flows through it ?
Solution :

Question 18:
An electric heater of resistance 8Ω, takes a current of 15 A from the mains supply line.
Calculate the rate at which heat is developed in the heater.
Solution :

Question 19:
A resistance of 25 Ω is connected to a 12 V battery. Calculate the heat energy in joules
generated per minute.
Solution :

Question 20:
100 joules of heat is produced per second in a 4 ohm resistor. What is the potential difference



across the resistor ?
Solution :

Question 21:
(a) Derive the expression for the heat produced due to a current ‘I’ flowing for a time interval ‘t’
through a resistor ‘R’ having a potential difference ‘V’ across its ends. With which name is this
relation known ?
(b) How much heat will an instrument of 12 W produce in one minute if it is connected to a
battery of 12 V ?
(c) The current passing through a room heater has been halved. What will happen to the heat
produced by it ?
(d) What is meant by the heating effect of current ? Give two applications of the heating effect
of current.
(e) Name the material which is used for making the filaments of an electric bulb.
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:67

Question 31:
The electrical resistivities of four materials P, Q, R and S are given below :



Which material will you use for making : (a) heating element of electric iron (b) connecting
wires of electric iron (c) covering of connecting wires ? Give reason for your choice in each
case.
Solution :
(a) S; because it has high resistivity of 11/10000000 ohm-m (it is actually nichrome).
(b) Q; because it has very low resistivity of 1.7/100000000 ohm-m (it is actually copper).
(c) R; because it has very very high resistivity of 1.0X100000000000000 ohm-m (it is actually
rubber).

Question 32:
(a) How does the wire in the filament of a light bulb behave differently to the other wires in the
circuit when the current flows ?
(b) What property of the filament wire accounts for this difference ?
Solution :
(a) The filament wire becomes white hot where as other wires in the circuit do not get heated
much.
(b) High resistance of filament wire accounts for this difference.

Question 33:
Two exactly similar heating resistances are connected (i) in series, and (ii) in parallel, in two
different circuits, one by one. If the same current is passed through both the combinations, is
more heat obtained per minute when they are connected in series or when they are connected
in parallel ? Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
In series, because total resistance in series connection is more than that in parallel
connection.

Question 34:
An electric iron is connected to the mains power supply of 220 V. When the electric iron is
adjusted at ‘minimum heating’ it consumes a power of 360 W but at ‘maximum heating’ it
takes a power of 840 W. Calculate the current and resistance in each case.
Solution :

Question 35:
Which electric heating devices in your home do you think have resistors which control the flow
of electricity ?
Solution :
Electric iron , electric oven, water heater, room heater.



 Life Processes

Question 1:
Which is the basic requirement of living organisms for obtaining energy ?
Solution :
Food is the basic requirement of living organisms for obtaining energy.

Question 2:
Which of the following type of energy is used by living organisms to perform vital life
processes ?
Kinetic energy, Chemical energy, Potential energy, Nuclear energy
Solution :
Chemical Energy.

Question 3:
Which of the following is an autotroph ? Green plant or Man
Solution :
Green Plant.

Question 4:
Name two inorganic substances which are used by autotrophs to make food.
Solution :
Carbon dioxide and Water.

Question 5:
What is the mode of nutrition in fungi ?
Solution :
Saprotrophic.

Question 6:
Name one organism each having saprophytic, parasitic and holozoic modes of nutrition.
Solution :



Saprophytic – Fungi.Parasitic – Plasmodium.Holozoic – Human Beings.

Question 7:
Name the process by which plants make food.
Solution :
Photosynthesis.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:24

Question 8:
In addition to carbon dioxide and water, state two other conditions necessary for the process
of photosynthesis to take place.
Solution :
Sunlight and chlorophyll.

Question 9:
Apart from sunlight and chlorophyll, what other things are required to make food by
photosynthesis ?
Solution :
Carbon dioxide and water.

Question 10:
(a) Name a gas used in photosynthesis.
(b) Name a gas produced in photosynthesis.
Solution :
(a) Carbon dioxide.
(b) Oxygen.

Question 11:
The leaves of a plant first prepare food A by photosynthesis. Food A then gets converted into
food What are A and B ?
Solution :
A is glucose and B is starch.

Question 12:
Which substance is used to remove chlorophyll from a green leaf during photosynthesis
experiments ?
Solution :
Alcohol.

Question 13:
Why do we boil the leaf in alcohol when we are testing it for starch ?
Solution :
We boil the leaf in Alcohol to remove all its green pigment called chlorophyll.

Question 14:
(a) Name the pigment in leaves which absorbs sunlight energy.
(b) What is the colour of this pigment ?
Solution :
(a) Chlorophyll. (b) Green.

Question 15:



Name the pigment which can absorb solar energy.
Solution :
Chlorophyll

Question 16:
Name the organelle of plant cells in which photosynthesis occurs.
Solution :
Chloroplast.

Question 17:
Apart from carbon dioxide and water, name four other raw materials which are needed by the
plants.
Solution :
Nitrogen, phosphorus, iron and magnesium.

Question 18:
Where is chlorophyll mainly present in a plant ?
Solution :
Leaves.

Question 19:
What is the name of those cells in the leaf of a plant which control the opening and closing of
stomata?
Solution :
Guard cells.

Question 20:
Name an animal whose process of obtaining food is called phagocytosis.
Solution :
Amoeba.

Question 21:
All the animals can be divided into three groups on the basis of their eating habits. Name the
three groups.
Solution :
(i) Herbivores.(ii) Carnivores.(iii) Omnivores.

Question 22:
What is the scientific name of the animals which are :
(i) only meat eaters ?
(ii) only plant eaters ?
(iii) both, plant and meat eaters ?
Solution :
(i) Carnivores.(ii) Herbivores.(iii) Omnivores.

Question 23:
Name the green pigment present in the leaves of a plant.
Solution :
Chlorophyll.

Question 24:
Arrange the following processes involved in the nutrition in animals in the correct order (in



which they take place):
Assimilation, Egestion, Ingestion, Absorption, Digestion
Solution :
Ingestion, digestion, absorption, assimilation, egestion.

Question 25:
How does Amoeba engulf the food particle ?
Solution :
Amoeba engulfs the food particles with the help of finger like projections called pseudopodia.

Question 26:
What substances enter into the food vacuole in Amoeba to break down the food ?
Solution :
Digestive enzymes.

Question 27:
From which part of the body, undigested food is egested in Amoeba ?
Solution :
Amoeba has no fixed place for egestion. The undigested food gets collected inside amoeba,
then its cell membrane suddenly ruptures and the undigested food is thrown out of the body
of amoeba.

Question 28:
Name a unicellular animal which uses cilia to move food particles into its mouth.
Solution :
Paramecium.

Question 29:
Name the enzyme present in human saliva. What type of food material is digested by this
enzyme ?
Solution :
Salivary amylase is present in human saliva. It digests starch.
Which of the organs perform the following functions in humans ?
(i) Absorption of food
(ii) Absorption of water

Question 30:
Which of the organs perform the following functions in humans ?
(i) Absorption of food
(ii) Absorption of water
Solution :
(i) Small Intestine.
(ii) Large Intestine.

Question 31:
What moves the food in the digestive organs ?
Solution :
Peristaltic movement.

Question 32:
What is the other name of food pipe ?
Solution :



Oesophagus.

Question 33:
What substance is mixed with food in the mouth during chewing by the teeth ?
Solution :
Saliva

Question 34:
What is the name of tiny projections on the inner surface of small intestine which help in
absorbing the digested food ?
Solution :
Villi.

Question 35:
In which part of the digestive system is water absorbed ?
Solution :
Large intestine.

Question 36:
What is the name of the opening in the human body through which undigested food is thrown
out ?
Solution :
Anus.

Question 37:
Where is digested food absorbed into blood in human body ?
Solution :
Small intestine.

Question 38:
Name the biological catalysts which bring about chemical digestion of food.
Solution :
Digestive enzymes.

Question 39:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) All green plants are…………..
(b) All non-green plants and animals are…………
(c) Heterotrophs depend on…….. and other……………… for food,
(d) Green plants use……… ,………… and………… to make food.
(e) Iodine turns blue-black on reacting with………………
Solution :
(a) Autotrophs.
(b) Heterotrophs.
(c) Autotrophs,
heterotrophs.
(d) Carbon dioxide, water.
(e) Starch.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:25

Question 40:



(a) What is chlorophyll ? What part does chlorophyll play in photosynthesis ?
(b) (i) Which simple food is prepared first in the process of photosynthesis ?
(ii) Name the food which gets stored in plant leaves.
Solution :
(a) Chlorophyll is a green coloured pigment present in the leaves of plants. It helps in
absorbing energy from sunlight during the process of photosynthesis.(b) (i) Glucose(ii) Starch.

Question 41:
(a) What criteria can be used to decide whether something is alive ?
(b) What is meant by life processes ? Name the basic life processes common to all living
organisms which are essential for maintaining life.
Solution :
(a) The criteria to decide whether something is alive is the movement.
(b) The basic functions performed by living organisms to maintain their life on this earth are
called life processes. The basic life processes common to all living organisms are ? Nutrition
and Respiration; Transport and Excretion; Control and Coordination; Growth; Movement and
Reproduction.

Question 42:
(a) What are autotrophs ? Give one example of autotrophs.
(b) What are the conditions necessary for autotrophic nutrition ?
Solution :
(a) Autotrophs are those organisms which can make their own food from carbon dioxide and
water. Example: Green Plants.(b) The conditions necessary for autotrophic nutrition are
sunlight, chlorophyll, carbon dioxide and water.

Question 43:
(a) What are heterotrophs ? Give one example of heterotrophs.
(b) What is the difference between autotrophic nutrition and heterotrophic nutrition ?
Solution :
(a) Those organisms which cannot make their own food from inorganic substances like
carbon dioxide and water, and depend on other organisms for their food are called
heterotrophs. Example: All Animals.
Autotrophic Nutrition
It is that mode of nutrition in which an organism makes its own food from the simple inorganic
materials like carbon dioxide and water present in the surroundings (with the help of sunlight
energy) Example: Green Plants
Heterotrophic Nutrition
It is that mode of nutrition in which an organism cannot make its own food from simple
inorganic materials like carbon dioxide and water, and depends on other organisms for its
food.Example: Animals.

Question 44:
(a) Define a nutrient. Name four important nutrients present in our food.
(b) What are the various types of heterotrophic nutrition ?
Solution :
(a) A nutrient can be defined as a substance which an organism obtains from its surroundings
and uses it as a source of energy or for the biosynthesis of its body constituents (like tissues
and organs). The four important nutrients present in our food are: carbohydrates, fats, proteins
and mineral salts.
(b) The various types of Heterotrophic nutrition are:
(i) Saprotrophic nutrition.



(ii) Parasitic nutrition.
(iii) Holozoic nutrition.

Question 45:
(a) Photosynthesis converts energy X into energy Y. What are X and Y ?
(b) State the various steps involved in the process of photosynthesis.
Solution :
(a) X is sunlight energy and Y is chemical energy.
(b) The photosynthesis takes place in the following three steps;
(i) Absorption of sunlight energy by chlorophyll.
(ii) Conversion of light energy into chemical energy and splitting of water into hydrogen and
oxygen by light energy.
(iii) Reduction of carbon dioxide by hydrogen to form carbohydrates like glucose by utilising
the chemical energy

Question 46:
(a) How do plants obtain food ?
(b) Why do plants need nitrogen ? How do plants obtain nitrogen ?
Solution :
(a) Plants obtain food by a process called photosynthesis.
(b) Plants need nitrogen to make proteins and other compounds. They take up nitrogen from
the soil in the form of inorganic salts called nitrates (or nitrites), or in the form of organic
compounds which are produced by bacteria from the atmospheric nitrogen.

Question 47:
Define (i) saprophytic nutrition (ii) parasitic nutrition, and (iii) holozoic nutrition. Give one
example of each type.
Solution :
(i) Saprophytic nutrition: It is that nutrition in which an organism obtains its food from dead
organic matter of dead plants, dead animals and rotten bread. Example: Fungi and many
bacteria obtain food by saprophytic nutrition.
(ii) Parasitic nutrition: It is that nutrition in which an organism derives its food from the body of
another living organism (called its host) without killing it.Example: Plasmodium and round
worms obtain food by parasitic nutrition.
(iii) Holozoic nutrition: It is that nutrition in which an organism takes the complex organic food
materials into its body by the process of ingestion; the ingested food is digested and then
absorbed into the body cells of the organism.Example: Human beings obtain food by holozoic
nutrition

Question 48:
Define (2) saprophyte, and (22) parasite. Name two saprophytes and two parasites.
Solution :
(a) Saprophyte – Saprophytes are the organisms which obtain their food from dead plants
(like rotten leaves), dead and decaying animal bodies, and other decaying organic matter (like
rotten bread).Example: Fungi and some bacteria.
(b) Parasite: A parasite is an organism (plant or animal) which feeds on another living
organism called its host.Example: Plasmodium and round worm.

Question 49:
(a) How does carbon dioxide from the air enter the leaves of a plant to be used in
photosynthesis ?
(b) How does water from the soil reach the leaves of a plant to be used in photosynthesis ?



Solution :
(a) The carbon dioxide gas enters the leaves of the plants through the stomata present on
their surface.
(b) The water required by the plants for photosynthesis is absorbed by the roots of the plants
from the soil through the process of osmosis. The absorbed water is then transported upward
through the xylem vessels to the leaves where it reaches the photosynthetic cells and utilized
in photosynthesis.

Question 50:
What substances are contained in gastric juice ? What are their functions ?
Solution :
The gastric juice contains three substances; hydrochloric acid, the enzyme pepsin and mucus.
Functions: (a) Hydrochloric acid: It makes the medium of gastric juice acidic so that the
enzyme pepsin can digest the proteins properly and also kills any bacteria that might have
entered the stomach with food.
(b) Pepsin: The enzyme pepsin digests the proteins present in the food and converts them into
smaller molecules.
(c) Mucus: The mucus helps to protect the stomach wall from its own secretions of
hydrochloric acid.

Question 51:
What substances are contained in pancreatic juice ? What are their functions ?
Solution :
Pancreatic juice contains digestive enzymes ? Pancreatic Amylase, trypsin and lipase.
Functions:
(a) Pancreatic amylase: The enzyme amylase breaks down the starch.
(b) Trypsin: trypsin digests the proteins.
(c) Lipase: Lipase breaks down the emulsified fats.

Question 52:
(a) What is the role of hydrochloric acid in our stomach ?
(b) What is the function of enzymes in the human digestive system ?
Solution :
(a) Hydrochloric acid: It makes the medium of gastric juice acidic so that the enzyme pepsin
can digest the proteins properly and also kills any bacteria that might have entered the
stomach with food.
(b) Enzymes help in the breaking down of complex organic food materials into simpler forms.

Question 53:
(a) Which part of the body secretes bile ? Where is bile stored ? What is the function of bile ?
(b) What is trypsin ? What is its function ?
Solution :
(a) Liver secretes bile which gets stored in the gall bladder. Bile performs two functions:
(i) Makes the acidic food coming from the stomach alkaline so that the pancreatic enzymes
can act on it.
(ii) Bile salts breaks the fats present in the food into small globules making it easy for the
enzymes to act and digest them.
(b) Trypsin: It is a pancreatic enzyme present in the pancreatic juice. Its function is to digest
the proteins.

Question 54:
What are the functions of liver and pancreas in the human digestive system ?



Solution :
Liver secretes bile which helps in the emulsification of fats. Pancreas secretes pancreatic juice
which emulsifies starch, proteins and fats.

Question 55:
Match the organisms given in column I with the processes given in column II :

Solution :
(i) – (c)
(ii) – (a)
(iii) – (d)
(iv) – (b)

Question 56:
Name the following :
(a) The process in plants which converts light energy into chemical energy.
(b) Organisms that cannot prepare their own food.
(c) Organisms that can prepare their own food.
(d) The cell organelle where photosynthesis occurs.
(e) The cells which surround a stomatal pore.
(f) An enzyme secreted by gastric glands in stomach which acts on proteins.
Solution :
(a) Photosynthesis.
(b) Heterotrophs.
(c) Autotrophs.
(d) Chloroplast.
(e) Guard cells.
(f) Pepsin.

Question 57:
Match the terms in column I with those in column II :

Solution :
(i) – (c)
(ii) – (d)
(iii) – (a)
(iv) – (b)

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:26

Question 58:
(a) What is common for Cuscuta, ticks and leeches ?
(b) Name the substances on which the following enzymes act in the human digestive system :
(i) Trypsin (ii) Amylase (iii) Pepsin (iv) Lipase



(c) Why does absorption of digested food occur mainly in the small intestine ?
Solution :
(a) Parasitic mode of nutrition.
(b)
(i) Proteins
(ii) Starch
(iii) Proteins
(iv) Fats.
(c) Absorption of digested foods occurs mainly in the small intestine due to the presence of a
large number of finger like projections called villi.

Question 59:
(a) Why is small intestine in herbivores longer than in carnivores ?
(b) What will happen if mucus is not secreted by the gastric glands ?
(c) What causes movement of food inside the alimentary canal ?
Solution :
(a) Herbivores eat only plants so they need a longer small intestine to allow the cellulose
present in the plants to be digested completely.
(b) If mucus is not secreted, hydrochloric acid will cause the erosion of inner lining of stomach
leading to the formation of ulcers in the stomach.
(c) The contraction and expansion movements of oesophagus also called peristaltic
movements pushes the food down into the elementary canal.

Question 60:
(a) How do guard cells regulate opening and closing of stomatal pores ?
(b) Two similar green plants are kept separately in oxygen free containers, one in dark and the
other in continuous light. Which one will live longer ? Give reasons.
Solution :
(a) The opening and closing of stomatal pores is controlled by the guard cells, when water
flows into the guard cells, they swell, become curved and cause the pore to open whereas
when the guard cells lose water, they shrink, become straight and close the stomatal pore. (b)
Plant kept in continuous light will live longer because it will be able to produce oxygen required
for its respiration by the process of photosynthesis.

Question 61:
(a) What would happen if all the green plants disappear from the earth ?
(b) If a plant is releasing carbon dioxide and taking in oxygen during the day, does it mean that
there is no photosynthesis occurring ? Justify your answer.
Solution :
(a) If all the green plants disappear from the earth, then all the organisms (herbivores,
carnivores and omnivores) will die due to starvation as green plants are the source of food for
all organisms.
(b) When photosynthesis occurs during the day, the carbon dioxide released by plants by
respiration is all used up and not released. Similarly, some of the oxygen produced during
photosynthesis is used up in respiration. Since the plant is releasing carbon dioxide and taking
in oxygen even during the day, it means that no photosynthesis is taking place.

Question 62:
(a) Leaves of a healthy potted plant were coated with vaseline. Will this plant remain healthy
for long ? Give reason for your answer.
(b) What will happen to the rate of photosynthesis in a plant under the following
circumstances ?



1. cloudy day in morning but bright sunshine in the afternoon
2. no rainfall in the area for a considerable time.
3. gathering of dust on the leaves

Solution :
(a) This plant will not remain healthy for long because vaseline coating closes the stomatal
pores on the leaves due to which
(i) plant will not get oxygen for respiration
(ii) plant will not get carbon dioxide for photosynthesis, and
(iii) plant will not get water (and minerals) due to stoppage of transpiration.
(b) (i) Decreases in morning but increases in the afternoon
(ii) Decreases.
(iii) Decreases.

Question 63:
(a) What is photosynthesis ?
(b) Write a chemical equation to show the process of photosynthesis in plants.
(c) Explain the mechanism of photosynthesis.
Solution :
(a) The process by which green plants make their own food (like glucose) from carbon dioxide
and water by using sunlight energy in the presence of chlorophyll is called photosynthesis.

(c) The process of photosynthesis takes place in the green leaves of a plant. The carbon
dioxide gas required for making food is taken by the plant leaves from the air which enters the
leaves through tiny pores called stomata. Water required for making food is taken from the
soil which is transported to the leaves from the soil through the roots and the stem. The
sunlight provides energy required to carry out the chemical reactions involved in the
preparation of food. The green pigment called chlorophyll absorbs sunlight energy. The
photosynthesis takes place in three steps:
(i) Absorption of sunlight energy by chlorophyll.
(ii) Conversion of light energy into chemical energy and splitting of water into hydrogen and
oxygen by light energy.
(iii) Reduction of carbon dioxide by hydrogen to form carbohydrates like glucose by utilising
the chemical energy.

Question 64:
(a) Name the raw materials required for photosynthesis. How do plants obtain these raw



materials ?
(b) What are the various conditions necessary for photosynthesis ?
(c) Name the various factors which affect the rate of photosynthesis in plants.
Solution :
(a) The raw materials for photosynthesis are carbon dioxide and water. The green plants take
carbon dioxide from air for photosynthesis. The carbon dioxide gas enters the leaves of the
plants through the stomata present on their surface. The water required by the plants for
photosynthesis is absorbed by the roots of the plants from the soil through the process of
osmosis. The water absorbed by the roots is transported upwards through the xylem vessels
to the leaves where it reaches the photosynthetic cells and utilized in photosynthesis.
(b) The conditions for photosynthesis are sunlight, chlorophyll, carbon dioxide and water.
(c) Factors affecting the rate of photosynthesis are
(i) Light
(ii) Carbon dioxide
(iii) Water
(iv) Temperature
(v) Mineral elements.

Question 65:
(a) Define nutrition. Why is nutrition necessary for an organism ?
(b) What are the different modes of nutrition ? Explain with one example of each mode of
nutrition.
(c) Name the mode of nutrition in (i) roundworm, and (ii) Plasmodium.
Solution :
(a) Nutrition is defined as a process of intake of nutrients (like carbohydrates, fats, proteins,
minerals, vitamins and water) by an organism as well as the utilisation of these nutrients by
the organism. Nutrition is necessary for an organism as it provides energy to them from the
food they eat. (b) There are mainly two modes of nutrition:
(i) Autotrophic – Autotrophic nutrition is that mode of nutrition in which an organism makes its
own food from the simple inorganic materials like carbon dioxide and water present in the
surroundings (with the help of sunlight energy). Example: Green plants obtain food by
autotrophic nutrition.
(ii) Heterotrophic – Heterotrophic nutrition is that mode of nutrition in which an organism
cannot make its own food from simple inorganic materials like carbon dioxide and water, and
depends on other organisms for its food. Example: All animals obtain food by heterotrophic
nutrition.
(c) The mode of nutrition in
(i) round worm and
(ii) plasmodium is parasitic nutrition.

Question 66:
(a) What are herbivores, carnivores and omnivores ? Give two examples of each.
(b) Classify the following into herbivores, carnivores and omnivores :
Lion, Man, Dog, Goat, Crow, Elephant, Snake, Hawk, Rabbit, Deer
(c) Name the five steps which occur in the process of nutrition in animals.
Solution :
(a) (i) Herbivores – Those animals which eat only plants are called herbivores. Example: Goat
and cow.
(ii) Carnivores – Those animals which eat only other animals as food are called carnivores.
Example: Tiger and Lion.
(iii) Omnivores – Those animals which eat both plants and animals are called omnivores.
Example: Human Being and dog.



(b)

(c) The five steps involved in the process of nutrition in animals are
(i) Ingestion
(ii) Digestion
(iii) Absorption
(iv) Assimilation
(v) Egestion.

Question 67:
(a) Describe the process of nutrition in Draw labelled diagrams to show the various steps in the
nutrition in Amoeba.
(b) What is the mode of nutrition in Amoeba known as ?
(c) What is the process of obtaining food by Amoeba called ? What does it mean ?
Solution :
(a) Nutrition in amoeba: Nutrition in amoeba involves the following steps
(i) Ingestion ? Amoeba has no mouth for ingestion of food. It ingests the food by using its
pseudopodia. The food is engulfed with little water to form a food vacuole.
(ii) Digestion ? The food is digested by digestive enzymes present in the cytoplasm which
breaks the food into small soluble molecules by chemical reactions.
(iii) Absorption ? The digested food is absorbed directly into the cytoplasm by diffusion. The
digested food spreads out from the food vacuole into the whole cell and after absorption the
food vacuole disappears.
(iv) Assimilation ? Food is used to obtain energy through respiration and the remaining part of
the food is used for growth.
(v) Egestion ? The undigested food collects inside the cell and the cell membrane ruptures.
Through this, the undigested food is thrown out of the body.

(b) The mode of nutrition in amoeba is holozoic.
(c) The process of obtaining food is called phagocytosis, which means cell feeding.

Question 68:
(a) Draw a labelled diagram of the human digestive system. With the help of this diagram,
describe the process of digestion of food in man (humans).



(b) Describe one way in which the small intestine is adapted for the absorption of digested
food.
(c) What is the special name of the contraction and expansion movement which pushes the
food further in our digestive tract (or alimentary canal) ?
Solution :
(a) Digestion of food in human beings: Digestion of food begins in the mouth. The mouth
cavity contains teeth, tongue and salivary glands. The teeth cut the food into small pieces,
chew and grind it. This is called physical digestion. Salivary glands produce saliva which mixes
with the food. This involves chemical digestion of food. The saliva contains an enzyme called
salivary amylase which digests the starch and converts it into maltose sugar. Mouth opens
into a small funnel shaped area called pharynx which leads to a long tube called oesophagus.
It carries the food down into the stomach. The wall of oesophagus is muscular. When the
slightly digested food enters the food pipe, the walls of the oesophagus starts contraction and
expansion movements called peristaltic movements which push the food into the stomach.
Digestion does not take place in the oesophagus. The glands present on the walls of the
stomach secrete gastric juice that contains hydrochloric acid, the enzyme pepsin and mucus.
A small amount of gastric lipase is also present that breaks down the fats present in the food.
Gastric juice is acidic due to the presence of HCl which is necessary for the pepsin to become
active and converts the proteins into peptones. The mucus protects the stomach walls from
HCl. From the stomach, the partially digested food goes into the small intestine through
sphincter muscle. Small intestine is divided into two parts: Duodenum and Ileum. Duodenum
receives the secretions of two glands, liver and pancreas through a common duct. Liver
secretes bile which is alkaline and contains salts to emulsify the fats (or lipids). The bile
secreted by the liver is stored in the gall bladder. Pancreas secretes pancreatic juice which
contains trypsin, lipase and pancreatic amylase. Trypsin digests the proteins, lipase emulsifies
the fats and pancreatic amylase breaks down the starch. Thus, small intestine is the site of
complete digestion of carbohydrates, proteins and fats. The walls of ileum secrete succus
entericus which completes the digestion process.

(b) The walls of small intestine has finger like projections like villi which increases the surface
area for absorption.
(c) Peristaltic movements.

Question 69:
(a) Describe the parts of our tooth with the help of a labelled diagram.
(b) What is meant by dental caries ? How are they caused ?
(c) What is dental plaque ? What harm can it do ? How can the formation of plaque be
prevented ?



Solution :
(a) The tooth has hard outer covering called enamel. The part of tooth below enamel is called
dentine inside which is the pulp cavity. The pulp cavity contains nerves and blood vessels.

(b) The formation of small cavities (or holes) in the teeth due to the action of acid forming
bacteria and improper dental care is called dental caries. This happens as follows: When we
eat sugary food, the bacteria in our mouth act on sugar to produce acids. These acids dissolve
the calcium salts from the tooth enamel and then from dentine forming small cavities in the
tooth over a period of time in our mouth act on sugar to produce acids. These acids dissolve
the calcium salts from the tooth enamel and then from dentine forming small cavities in the
tooth over a period of time.
(c) If the teeth are not cleaned regularly, they become covered with the sticky, yellowish layer
of food particles and bacteria cells called dental plaque. It causes tooth decay. It can be
prevented by brushing the teeth regularly as it neutralises the acids.

Question 70:
(a) Name the main organs of the human digestive system. Also name the associated glands.
(b) How do carbohydrates, fats and proteins get digested in human beings ?
Solution :
(a) The various organs of the human digestive system are mouth, oesophagus, stomach, small
intestine and large intestine. The glands associated with the human digestive system are
salivary glands, liver and pancreas.
(b) (i) Carbohydrates – The digestion of carbohydrates begins in the mouth. The human saliva
contains an enzyme called salivary amylase which digests the starch present in the food into
maltose sugar. The slightly digested carbohydrates when reaches the small intestine,
pancreatic amylase present in the pancreatic juice breaks down the starch. The intestinal juice
of the small intestine completes the digestion of carbohydrates and finally coverts it into
glucose.
(ii) Fats – The process of digestion of fats begins in the stomach. The glands of stomach
secrete a small amount of gastric lipase that breaks down the fats present in the food. From
the stomach the partially digested food goes into small intestine where the pancreatic lipase
breaks down the emulsified fats. The walls of small intestine secrete intestinal juice which
converts the fats into fatty acids and glycerol.
(iii) Proteins – The digestion of proteins begins in the stomach. The glands of the stomach
secrete gastric juice which contains an enzyme called pepsin. Pepsin converts the proteins
into peptones. Pancreatic juice contains trypsin which digests the proteins into peptides and
the intestinal juice completes the process of digestion of proteins thus converting it into amino
acids.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:46



Question 1:
Do all cells use oxygen to produce energy ?
Solution :
No.

Question 2:
Name one substance which is produced in anaerobic respiration by an organism but not in
aerobic respiration.
Solution :
Ethanol.

Question 3:
Name one organism which can live without oxygen.
Solution :
Yeast can live without oxygen.

Question 4:
In which type of respiration, aerobic or anaerobic, more energy is released ?
Solution :
Aerobic respiration.

Question 5:
Name the substance whose build up in the muscles during vigorous physical exercise may
cause cramps.
Solution :
Lactic acid.

Question 6:
Which part of roots is involved in the exchange of respiratory gases ?
Solution :
Root hairs.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:47

Question 7:
Name the process by which plant parts like roots, stems, and leaves get oxygen required for
respiration.
Solution :
Diffusion.

Question 8:
Name the pores in a leaf through which respiratory exchange of gases takes place.
Solution :
Stomata.

Question 9:
Name the areas in a woody stem through which respiratory exchange of gases takes place.
Solution :
Lenticels.

Question 10:
What is the name of the extensions of the epidermal cells of a root which help in respiration ?



Solution :
Root hair.

Question 11:
Out of photosynthesis and respiration in plants, which process occurs :
(a) all the time ?
(b) only at daytime ?
Solution :
(a) Respiration.
(b) Photosynthesis.

Question 12:
Name the organs of breathing in fish.
Solution :
Gills.

Question 13:
Name an animal which absorbs oxygen through its moist skin.
Solution :
Earthworm.

Question 14:
Name an animal which depends on simple diffusion of gases for breathing.
Solution :
Amoeba.

Question 15:
Name two animals which breathe through gills.
Solution :
Prawns and mussels.

Question 16:
The trachea divides into two tubes at its lower end. What is the name of these tubes ?
Solution :
Bronchi.

Question 17:
Where does the blood absorb oxygen in the human body ?
Solution :
Alveoli.

Question 18:
Name the red pigment which carries oxygen in blood.
Solution :
Haemoglobin.

Question 19:
Which gases are exchanged in your lungs ?
Solution :
Oxygen and carbon dioxide.

Question 20:



Where in the lungs does gas exchange take place ?
Solution :
Alveoli.

Question 21:
What is the name of tiny air-sacs at the end of smallest bronchioles in the lungs ?
Solution :
Alveoli.

Question 22:
What is the other name of wind-pipe ?
Solution :
Trachea.

Question 23:
What organs are attached to the two bronchi ?
Solution :
Lungs.

Question 24:
In the lungs :
(a) what substance is taken into the body ?
(b) what substance is removed from the body ?
Solution :
(a) Oxygen.
(b) Carbon dioxide.

Question 25:
State whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) During respiration, the plants take C02 and release 02.
(b) Energy can be produced in cells without oxygen.
(c) Fish and earthworm exchange gases during respiration in the same way.
Solution :
(a) False.
(b) True.
(c) False.

Question 26:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The organs of respiration in man are the…………..
(b) The actual exchange of gases takes place in the………… of the lungs.
(c) ………………in the lungs provide a very large surface area for gaseous exchange.
(d) Yeast undergoes……….. respiration whereas Amoeba undergoes………….. respiration.
(e) Gills are the breathing organs in…………..
Solution :
(a) Lungs.
(b) Alveoli.
(c) Alveoli.
(d) Anaerobic, aerobic.
(e) Fish.

Question 27:



Explain why, a land plant may die if its roots remain water logged for a long time.
Solution :
A land plant may die if its roots remain water logged for a long time because too much water
expels all the air from in-between the soil particles. Due to this, oxygen is not available to the
roots for aerobic respiration. Under these conditions the roots will respire anaerobically
producing alcohol which may kill the plant.

Question 28:
What are the differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration ? Name some organisms
that use anaerobic mode of respiration.
Solution :
(a)
Aerobic respiration
(i) Aerobic respiration takes place in the presence of oxygen.
(ii) Complete breakdown of food occurs in aerobic respiration.
(iii) The end products in aerobic respiratin are carbon dioxide and water.
(iv) Aerobic respiration produces a considerable amount of energy.
Anaerobic respiration
(i) Anaerobic respiration takes place in the absence of oxygen.
(ii) Partial break down of food occurs in anaerobic respiration.
(iii) The end products in anaerobic respiration are ethanol and carbon dioxide (in yeast) and
lactic and (in animal muscles).
(iv) Much less energy is produced in anaerobic respiration.
(b) Yeast and some bacteria.

Question 29:
Name the final product/products obtained in the anaerobic respiration, if it takes place :
(a) in a plant (like yeast).
(b) in an animal tissue (like muscles).
Solution :
(a) Ethanol and carbon dioxide.(b) Lactic acid.

Question 30:
What type of respiration takes place in human muscles during vigorous physical exercise ?
Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
Anaerobic respiration takes place in human muscles during vigorous physical exercise
because oxygen gets used up faster in the muscle cells than can be supplied by the blood.

Question 31:
Name the type of respiration in which the end products are :
(a) C2H,OH and C02
(b) C02 and H20
(c) Lactic acid
Give one example of each case where such a respiration can occur.
Solution :
(a) Anaerobic respiration in yeast.
(b) Aerobic respiration in humans.
(c) Anaerobic respiration in muscle tissue of animals.

Question 32:
Define breathing. State the differences between breathing and respiration.



Solution :
The mechanism by which an organism obtains oxygen from the air and releases carbon
dioxide is called breathing.Difference between breathing and respiration:-
Breathing
(i) Breathing is a simple process.
(ii) Breathing involves taking in oxygen from the air and releasing carbon dioxide into the air.
(iii) Breathing is a physical process.
Respiration
(i) Respiration is a complex process.
(ii) Respiration includes breathing as well as the oxidation of food in the cells of the organism
to release energy.
(iii) Respiration is a bio-chemical process.

Question 33:
What are the different ways in which glucose is oxidised to provide energy in various
organisms ? Give one example of each.
Solution :
There are two ways in which glucose is oxidized to provide energy in various organisms:
(i) Anaerobic respiration ? The respiration which takes place without oxygen is called anaerobic
respiration.Example: Yeast and some bacteria break down glucose into ethanol and carbon
dioxide.
(ii) Aerobic respiration ? The respiration which uses oxygen is called aerobic
respiration.Example: Plants and animals break down glucose completely into carbon dioxide
and water to release energy.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:48

Question 34:
Explain why, when air is taken in and let out during breathing, the lungs always contain a
residual volume of air.
Solution :
During the breathing cycle, when air is taken in and let out, the lungs always contain a certain
residual volume of air so that there is sufficient time ‘for the oxygen absorbed’ into the blood
and ‘for the carbon dioxide to be released’ from the blood.

Question 35:
Explain why, it is dangerous to inhale air containing carbon monoxide.
Solution :
It is dangerous to inhale air containing carbon monoxide as it binds very strongly with
haemoglobin in the blood and prevents it from carrying oxygen to the brain and other parts of
the body. Due to lack of oxygen, the person cannot breathe properly and may become
unconscious or may even die.

Question 36:
Describe the process of respiration in State whether it is anaerobic respiration or aerobic
respiration.
Solution :
(a) Respiration in amoeba: Amoeba depends on simple diffusion of gases for breathing. The
diffusion of gases takes place through the thin cell membrane of amoeba. Amoeba lives in
water which contains dissolved oxygen. The oxygen from water diffuses into the body of
amoeba through its cell membrane. The oxygen spreads quickly into the whole body and is
used for respiration inside the amoeba cell. The process of respiration produces carbon



dioxide which diffuses out through its cell membrane into the surrounding water.

(b) It is aerobic respiration.

Question 37:
State the three common features of all the respiratory organs like skin, gills and lungs.
Solution :
The common features of all respiratory organs ? skin, gills and lungs are: (i) All the respiratory
organs have a large surface area to get enough oxygen.(ii) All the respiratory organs have thin
walls for easy diffusion and exchange of respiratory gases.(iii) All the respiratory organs like
skin, gills and lungs have a rich blood supply for transporting respiratory gases.

Question 38:
Describe the process of respiration in fish.
Solution :
Respiration and fish: The fish has special organ of breathing called gills on both the sides of its
head. The gills are covered by gill covers. The fish lives in water which contains dissolved
oxygen. The fish breathes by taking in water through its mouth and sending it over the gills.
When water passes over the gills, the gills extract dissolved oxygen from the water. The
extracted oxygen is absorbed by the blood and carried to all the parts of the fish. The carbon
dioxide produced by respiration is brought back by the blood into the gills for expelling into the
surrounding water.

Question 39:
What would be the consequences of deficiency of haemoglobin in our bodies ?
Solution :
The deficiency of haemoglobin in the blood of a person reduces the oxygen carrying capacity



of blood resulting in breathing problems, tiredness and lack of energy.

Question 40:
Describe the process of respiration in the following parts of a plant :
(a) Root (b) Stem (c) Leaves
Solution :
(a) Respiration in roots: The roots of a plant take the oxygen required for respiration from the
air present in-between the soil particles by the process of diffusion. The roots have extensions
of epidermal cells of a root called root hair which are in contact with the air in the soil. Oxygen
diffuses from root hairs and reaches all the other cells of the root for respiration. Carbon
dioxide gas produced in the cells of the root during respiration moves out through the root
hairs by the process of diffusion. Thus, the respiration in roots occurs by diffusion of
respiratory gases through the root hairs.
(b) Respiration in stems: The stems of herbaceous plants takes place through stomata. The
oxygen from the air diffuses into the stem of a herbaceous plant through stomata and reaches
all the cells for respiration. The carbon dioxide produced diffuses out through stomata. In
woody stems, the bark has lenticels for the exchange of gases.
(c) Respiration in leaves: The leaves of a plant has tiny pores called stomata through which the
exchange of respiratory gases takes place by diffusion. Oxygen from air diffuses into a leaf
through stomata and reaches all the cells, where it is used for respiration and the carbon
dioxide produced diffuses out from the leaf into the air through stomata.

Question 41:
(a) What is meant by aquatic animals and terrestrial animals ?
(b) From where do the aquatic animals and terrestrial animals obtain oxygen for breathing and
respiration ?
Solution :
(a) Aquatic animals are the animals which live in water and the terrestrial animals are the
animals which live on land.
(b) The aquatic animals use the oxygen dissolved in water to carry out respiration. The
terrestrial animals obtain oxygen from air.

Question 42:
Why do fishes die when taken out of water ?
Solution :
Fishes die when taken out of water because they do not have lungs to utilize the oxygen of air
for breathing and respiration. They have gills which can extract only dissolved oxygen from
water.

Question 43:
Why is the rate of breathing in aquatic organisms much faster than in terrestrial organisms ?
Solution :
The rate of breathing in aquatic animals is much faster than terrestrial animals because the
amount of oxygen dissolved in water is low as compared to the amount of oxygen dissolved in
air.

Question 44:
Name the energy currency in the living organisms. When and where is it produced ?
Solution :
The energy currency of the cell is ‘ATP’. It is produced in cytoplasm in lower organisms which
respire anaerobically. In higher organisms, ‘ATP’ is produced in mitochondria when they
respire aerobically.



Question 45:
Explain why, plants have low energy needs as compared to animals.
Solution :
Plants do not move. In a large plant body there are many dead cells like sclerenchyma as a
result it requires less energy as compared to animals.

Question 46:
Explain how, it would benefit deep sea divers if humans also had gills.
Solution :
If humans also had gills then the deep sea divers could remain under sea water even without
carrying oxygen cylinders for breathing as they would be able to extract the dissolved oxygen
from water for breathing purpose just like a fish does.

Question 47:
(a) What is the function of the respiratory system ?
(b) What are the major organs of respiratory system in man (or humans) ?
(c) Draw a labelled diagram of the human respiratory system.
Solution :
(a) The function of respiratory system is to breathe in oxygen for respiration (producing energy
from food), and to breathe out carbon dioxide produced by respiration.
(b) The major organs of respiratory system in human beings are:
(i) Nose
(ii) Nasal Passage
(iii) Trachea
(iv) Bronchi
(v) Lungs and
(vi) diaphragm.

Question 48:
(a) Explain how, the air we breathe in gets cleaned while passing through the nasal passage.
(b) Why do the walls of trachea not collapse when there is less air in it ?
(c) How are oxygen and carbon dioxide exchanged in our body during respiration ?
(d) How are lungs designed in human beings to maximise the exchange of gases ?
Solution :
(a) When air passes through the nasal passage, the dust particles and other impurities present
in it are trapped by nasal hair and mucus so that clean air goes into the lungs.
(b) Trachea does not collapse even when there is no air in it because it is supported by rings of



soft bones called cartilage.
(c) During the process of ‘breathing in’ the air sacs or alveoli of the lungs get filled with air
containing oxygen. The alveoli are surrounded by capillaries carrying blood so the oxygen of air
diffuses from the alveoli walls into the blood from where it is carried to all the parts of the
body.As the blood passes through the tissues of the body, the oxygen present in it diffuses
into the cells. This oxygen combines with the digested food to release energy. Carbon dioxide
gas is produced as a waste product during respiration in the cells of the body tissues which
diffuses into the blood. Blood carries the carbon dioxide back to the lungs where it diffuses
into the alveoli.
(d) The human lungs have been designed to maximise the exchange of gases as there are
millions of alveoli in the lungs which provides a large surface area for the exchange of gases.

Question 49:
(a) Give the main points of difference between respiration in plants and respiration in animals.
(b) Describe the exchange of gases which takes place in the leaves of a plant (a) during
daytime, and (b) at night.
(c) Which contains more carbon dixoide : exhaled air or inhaled air ? Why ?
Solution :
Respiration in plants
(i) All the parts of the plants perform respiration individually.
(ii) During respiration in plants there is a little transport of respiratory gases from one part of
the plant to the other.
(iii) The respiration in plants occurs at a slow rate.
Respiration in Animals
(i) An animal perfomrs respiration as a single unit.
(ii) Respiratory gases are usually transported over long distances inside an animal during
respiration.
(iii) The respiration in animals occurs at a much faster rate.
(b)
(i) During daytime when photosynthesis occurs, oxygen is produced. The leaves use some of
this oxygen for respiration and the rest of oxygen diffuses out into the air. Carbon dioxide
produced by respiration is all used up in photosynthesis by leaves during the daytime. Even
more carbon dioxide is taken in from air. Thus, the net gas exchange in leaves during daytime
is: Oxygen diffuses out; Carbon dioxide diffuses in.
(ii) At night time, when no photosynthesis occurs and hence no oxygen is produced, oxygen
from air diffuses in leaves to carry out respiration. Carbon dioxide produced by respiration
diffuses out into air. So, the net gas exchange in leaves at night is: Oxygen diffuses in; Carbon
dioxide diffuses out. (c) Exhaled air contains more carbon dioxide because during the
respiration process when oxygen breaks down glucose, then a lot of carbon dioxide is
produced hence the exhaled air has a higher proportion of the same.

Question 50:
(a) “Respiration is a vital function of the body”. Justify this statement.
(b) What is the main difference between aerobic respiration and anaerobic respiration ? Give
one example of each.
(c) What type of repiration takes place (i) in yeast, and (ii) in humans ?
Solution :
(a) Respiration is a vital function of the body as it provides energy for carrying out all the life
processes which are necessary to keep the organism alive.
(b)
Aerobic respiration
(i) Aerobic respiration takes place in the presence of oxygen.



(ii) Complete breakdown of food occurs in aerobic respiration.
(iii) The end products in aerobic respiration are carbon dioxide and water.
(iv) Aerobic respiration produces a considerable amount of energy.
Example: Human Beings.
Anaerobic respiration
(i) Anaerobic respiration takes place in the absence of oxygen.
(ii) Partial breakdown of food occurs in anaerobic respiration.
(iii) The end products in anaerobic respiration are ethanol and carbon dioxide (in yeast) and
lactic acid (in animal muscles).
(iv) Much less energy is produced in anaerobic respiration. Example: Yeast.
(c)
(i) Anaerobic respiration.
(ii) Aerobic respiration.

Question 51:
(a) Why is diffusion insufficient to meet the oxygen requirements of large multicellular
organisms like humans ?
(b) What type of arrangement exists in the bodies of large animals to meet their oxygen
requirements adequately ?
(c) What advantage a terrestrial animal has over an aquatic animal with regard to obtaining
oxygen for respiration ?
Solution :
(a) Diffusion is insufficient to meet the oxygen requirements of large multicellular organisms
like humans because the volume of human body is so big that the oxygen cannot diffuse into
all the cells of the human body quickly and oxygen will have to travel large distances to reach
each and every cell of the body.
(b) Large organisms contain a respiratory pigment called haemoglobin which carries the
oxygen from the lungs to all the body cells very efficiently.
(c) A terrestrial animal has an advantage over an aquatic animal in regard to obtaining oxygen
for respiration that it is surrounded by an oxygen rich atmosphere from where it can take any
amount of oxygen.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:72

Question 1:
What is the name of tissues which transport :
(a) food in a plant ?
(b) water and minerals in a plant ?
Solution :
(a) Phloem.
(b) Xylem.

Question 2:
What substance/substances are transported in plants by :
(a) xylem vessels and tracheids ?
(b) sieve tubes (or phloem) ?
Solution :
(a) Water.
(b) Food.

Question 3:
Which organ acts as a pump in the circulatory system ?



Solution :
Heart.

Question 4:
Veins and arteries carry blood. Which of these carry blood :
(a) away from the heart ?
(b) back to the heart ?
Solution :
(a) Arteries.
(b) Veins.

Question 5:
Where does blood absorb oxygen ?
Solution :
Capillaries.

Question 6:
What stops blood from flowing backwards through the heart ?
Solution :
Valves stop the blood from flowing backward through the heart.

Question 7:
Name (i) largest artery, and (ii) largest vein, in our body.
Solution :
(i) The largest artery in the human body is ‘Aorta’.
(ii) The largest vein in the human body is ‘Vena Cava’.

Question 8:
What gaseous waste products are excreted by plants ?
Solution :
Carbon dioxide, water vapour and oxygen.

Question 9:
Where is the dirty blood in our body filtered ?
Solution :
Glomerulus present in kidneys.

Question 10:
Name the procedure used in the working of artificial kidney.
Solution :
Dialysis.

Question 11:
From the following terms, choose one term which includes the other four :
Plasma, Platelets, Blood, RBC, WBC
Solution :
Blood.

Question 12:
What are the components of the transport system in highly organised plants ?
Solution :
Xylem and phloem.



Question 13:
Out of xylem and phloem, which one carries materials :
(a) upwards as well as downwards ?
(b) only upwards ?
Solution :
(a) Phloem.(b) Xylem.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:73

Question 14:
Name two liquids which help in the transport of substances in the human body.
Solution :
Blood and lymph.

Question 15:
What is the other name of main vein ?
Solution :
Vena Cava.

Question 16:
Name the conducting tissue of plants which is made of sieve tubes alongwith companion
cells.
Solution :
Phloem.

Question 17:
Name the conducting tissue in plants which is made of (a) living cells, and (b) dead cells.
Solution :
(a) Phloem.
(b) Xylem.

Question 18:
State the term used for the transport of food from leaves to other parts of plant.
Solution :
Translocation.

Question 19:
Which process in a plant is accomplished by utilising energy from ATP : transport of water and
minerals or transport of food ?
Solution :
Transport of food.

Question 20:
Name the two types of transport systems in the human beings.
Solution :
Blood circulatory system and lymphatic system.

Question 21:
Name a waste gas released by the plants (a) only during the day time, and (b) only during the
night time.
Solution :
(a) Oxygen.



(b) Carbon dioxide.

Question 22:
Name one animal having single circulation of blood and another having double circulation.
Solution :
A fish has single circulation of blood and a frog has double circulation of blood.

Question 23:
State whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) Some organisms store wastes in body parts.
(b) The value of systolic pressure is always lower than that of diastolic pressure.
Solution :
(a) True.
(b) False.

Question 24:
Name the two parts of a plant through which its gaseous waste products are released into the
air.
Solution :
Stomata in the leaves and lenticels in the stems are two parts through which a plant releases
its gaseous waste products into the air.

Question 25:
What happens to the glucose which enters the nephron tubule alongwith the filtrate ?
Solution :
Glucose passes through the glomerulus alongwith the filtrate and gets collected in the
Bowman’s capsule.

Question 26:
Name the two waste products of the human body which are produced in the body cells.
Solution :
Carbon dioxide and urea.

Question 27:
What is the role of glomerulus in the kidney ?
Solution :
The function of glomerulus is to filter the blood passing through it and initiate urine formation.

Question 28:
What is the the other name of ‘high blood pressure’ ?
Solution :
Hypertension.

Question 29:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Gums and resins are the………….. products of plants.
(b) Bowman’s capsule and tubule taken together make a…………….
(c) The organs which extract the nitrogenous wastes from the blood are……………….
(d) The extracellular fluid which always flows from body tissues to the heart is called…………………
(e) The………… blood cells make antibodies whereas…………… blood cells help in respiration.
Solution :
(a) Waste.



(b) Nephron.
(c) Kidneys.
(d) Lymph.
(e) White, red.

Question 30:
What is xylem tissue ? Name the two kinds of cells in xylem tissue. State whether these cells
are living or dead.
Solution :
Xylem tissue is a vascular tissue in plants which carries water and minerals from the roots to
the various of the plant. Xylem tissue has two types of cells ? Xylem vessels and tracheids.
Both these tissues are dead cells.

Question 31:
What is phloem tissue ? Phloem contains two types of cells joined side by side. Name these
two types of cells. State whether these cells are living or dead.
Solution :
Phloem tissue is a vascular tissue which transports the food materials made in the leaves to
the other parts of the plant. Phloem is made up of many cells joined end to end to form long
tubes. The cells of the phloem are sieve tubes and companion cell. These are living cells.

Question 32:
(a) What is transpiration ?
What do you mean by ‘translocation’ with respect to transport in plants ?
Which plant tissue is involved in translocation : xylem or phloem ?
Solution :
(a) The evaporation of water from the leaves of the plants is called transpiration.(b) The
transport of food from the leaves to the other parts of the plant is called translocation.(c)
Phloem.

Question 33:
(a) Draw a labelled diagram of (z) a xylem vessel, and (ii) a sieve tube (or phloem).
(b) What are the differences between the transport of materials in xylem and phloem ?
Solution :

 



Question 34:
Match the terms in column I with their uses in column II

Solution :

Question 35:
Define excretion. Name the excretory unit of a kidney.
Solution :
The process of removal of toxic waste from the body of an organism is called excretion. The
excretory unit of a kidney is called nephron.

Question 36:
(a) What job is done by the kidneys ?
(b) What do kidneys excrete ?
(c) What is the name of the tubes which connect the kidneys to bladder ?
(d) What does the bladder in our body do ?
Solution :
(a) The kidneys remove the poisonous substance urea, other waste salts and excess water
from the blood in the form of yellowish liquid called urine.(b) Urea.(c) Ureters.(d) Urinary



bladder is a bag which stores the urine temporarily till it is excreted out.

Question 37:
Why do some people need to use a dialysis machine ? What does the machine do ?
Solution :
When there is a kidney failure then dialysis machine is used. Dialysis cleans the blood of a
person by separating the waste substance (urea) from the blood.

Question 38:
What is the liquid part of the blood called ? What is the function of platelets in the blood ?
Solution :
The liquid part of the blood is called plasma. Platelets help in the coagulation of blood in a cut
or wound.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:74

Question 39:
(a) How many types of blood vessels are there in the human body ? Name them.
(b) Why does the heart need valves ?
Solution :
(a) There are three types of blood vessels – arteries, veins and capillaries.(b) Heart needs
valves to prevent the backflow of blood so that the blood flows only in one direction.

Question 40:
A dialysis machine contains long tubes coiled in a tank containing dialysing solution :
(i) Of what substance are the tubes made ?
(ii) What does the dialysing solution contain ?
(iii) Name the main waste which passes into the dialysing solution.
Solution :
(i) Cellulose.
(ii) Water, glucose, salts in similar concentration to those in normal blood.
(iii) Urea.

Question 41:
State the differences between artery, vein and capillary.
Solution :

Question 42:
(a) What are the upper parts of the heart called ?
(b) What are the lower parts of the heart called ?



(c) What is the name of blood vessels which connect arteries to veins ?
(d)
(i) Which side of the heart pumps blood into the lungs ? .
(ii) Which side of the heart pumps blood into entire body (except the lungs) ?
Solution :
(a) Atria
(b) Ventricles
(c) Capillaries
(d)
(i) Right side
(ii) Left side

Question 43:
(a) What are the methods used by plants to get rid of their waste products ?
(b) How are waste products excreted in Amoeba ?
Solution :
(a) Thevarious methods used by the plants to get rid of their waste products are
(i) the plants get rid of gaseous waste products through stomata in leaves and lenticels in
stems.
(ii) They get rid of solid and liquid waste by shedding off leaves, peeling of bark and falling of
fruits.
(iii) Secreting gums and resins.
(iv) Plants excrete some waste substances into the soil around them.
(b) Excretion in amoeba: In amoeba, the waste material carbon dioxide is removed by diffusion
through the cell membrane, but nitrogenous waste and excess water are removed by
contractile vacuole.

Question 44:
(a) What is lymph ? State two major functions of lymph.
(b) What is meant by saying that the blood pressure of a person is 120/80 ?
Solution :
(a) Lymph is a light yellow liquid. It is a medium of circulation in human body which flows only
in one direction – from body tissues to the heart. The functions of lymph are:
(i) It takes part in the nutritive process of the body.
(ii) It protects the body by killing the germs drained out of the body tissues with the help of
lymphocytes contained in the lymph nodes, by making antibodies.
(iii) It helps in removing the waste products like fragments of dead cells etc.
(b) If the blood pressure of a person is 120/80 it means that the systolic pressure is 120 mm
Hg and diastolic pressure is 80 mm Hg.

Question 45:
What is hypertension ? Why is it caused ? What harm can it do ?
Solution :
High blood pressure is called hypertension. It is caused by the constriction of very small
arteries which results in increased resistance to blood flow. Very high blood pressure can lead
to rupture of artery and internal bleeding.

Question 46:
What are the various components of blood ? State their functions.
Solution :
The main components of blood are:
(i) Plasma: It carries all the dissolved substances such as proteins, digested food, common



salt etc from one part to another part of the body.
(ii) Red blood corpuscles (RBC): It carries oxygen from the lungs to all the cells of the body.
(iii) White blood corpuscles (WBC): It fights infection and protects us from diseases.
(iv) Platelets: It helps in the coagulation of blood in a cut or wound.

Question 47:
With which human organ systems (or human systems) are the following associated ?
(i) vena cava (ii) glomerulus (in’) alveoli (iv) villi
Solution :
(i) Circulatory system.
(ii) Excretory system.
(iii) Respiratory system.
(iv) Digestive system.

Question 48:
What is meant by ‘systolic pressure’ and ‘diastolic pressure’ ? What are their normal values ?
Solution :
The maximum pressure at which the blood leaves the heart through the main artery (Aorta)
during contraction phase is called systolic pressure. The minimum pressure in the arteries
during relaxation phase of the heart is called the diastolic pressure. The normal blood pressure
values are: Systolic pressure: 120 mm Hg. Diastolic pressure: 80 mm Hg.

Question 49:
(a) What is meant by ‘heart beat’ ? What is the usual heart beat rate at rest ?
(b) What change occurs in heart beats if a person runs for a while ? Why ?
Solution :
(a) Heart beat: One complete contraction and relaxation of the heart is called a heart beat. The
usual heart beat rate at rest is 72 times /minute.
(b) The heart beats faster when a person runs for a while because the body needs more
energy under these conditions.

Question 50:
(a) What is blood ? Why is it red ?
State the functions of blood in our body.
Name a circulatory fluid in the human body other than blood.
Solution :
(a) Blood is a red coloured liquid which circulates in our body. It is red because it contains a
pigment called haemoglobin in its red cells.
(b) Functions of blood:
(i) It carries oxygen from the lungs to different parts of the body.
(ii) It carries carbon dioxide from the body cells to the lungs for breathing out.
(iii) It carries digested food from the small intestine to all the parts of the body.
(iv) It carries waste product called urea from the liver to the kidneys for excretion in the form of
urine.
(v) It protects the body from diseases.(c) Lymph.

Question 51:
(a) What is meant by human circulatory system ? Name the organs of the circulatory system in
humans.
Draw a diagram of the human heart and label its parts.
What is meant by the terms ‘single circulation’ and ‘double circulation’ ?
Solution :



(a) Human circulatory system is a system which is responsible for the transport of materials
inside the body. The various organs of the circulatory system in humans are: heart, arteries,
veins and capillaries.
(b)

(c) Single circulation is a type of circulatory system in which the blood passes through the
heart only once in one complete cycle of the body.Double circulation is a circulatory system in
which the blood travels twice through the heart in one complete cycle of the body.

Question 52:
Describe the working of human blood circulatory system with the help of a suitable diagram
which shows all the steps involved.
Solution :
Working of Human blood circulatory system takes place in the steps below:
(i) When the muscles of all the four chambers are relaxed, the pulmonary vein brings the
oxygenated blood from the lungs in the left atrium of the heart.
(ii) When the left atrium contracts, the oxygenated blood is pushed into the left ventricle
through valve V1.
(iii) When the left ventricle contracts, the oxygenated blood enters the main artery called aorta
from which it goes to the different body organs through small branches called arterioles and
capillaries. (iv) The main artery carries the blood to all the organs of the body head, arms etc
except the lungs. The oxygenated blood gives off oxygen, digested food and dissolved
materials to the body cells. The carbon dioxide produced in the cells enters the blood. The
deoxygenated blood enters main vein called vena cava which carried it to the right atrium of
the heart.
(v) When the right atrium contracts, the deoxygenated blood enters right ventricle through
valve V2.
(vi) When the right ventricle contracts, the deoxygenated blood enters the lungs through
pulmonary artery and releases carbon dioxide and absorbs fresh oxygen from air. The blood
becomes oxygenated again and is sent to the left atrium of heart by pulmonary vein for
circulation in the body. This whole process is repeated continuously.



Question 53:
(a) Name the red pigment which carries oxygen in the blood.
(b) Why is it necessary to separate oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in mammals and
birds ?
(c) How many chambers are there in the heart of : (i) an amphibian, (ii) a mammal, and (iii) a
fish ?
(d) Describe the circulatory system in a fish.
Solution :
(a) Haemoglobin.
(b) It is necessary to separate the oxygenated blood from mixing with deoxygenated blood as
mammals and birds have high energy needs because they constantly require energy to
maintain their body temperature.
(c)
(i) Three chambered heart.
(ii) Four chambered heart.(iii) Two chambered heart.
(d) The fish has a two chambered heart. Oxygenation of the blood takes place in the gills. The
oxygenated blood from the gills is supplied to the body parts of the fish where oxygen is
utilized and carbon dioxide enters into it making it deoxygenated. The deoxygenated blood
returns to the heart to be pumped into gills again.

Question 54:
(a) What is lymphatic system ? What are its functions ?
(b) What is blood pressure ? What are the two factors used to express the blood pressure of a
person ?
(c) Name the main nitrogenous waste in the human blood. How is it removed from the blood ?
Solution :
(a) Lymphatic system: A system of tiny tubes called lymph vessels (lymphatics) and lymph
nodes (lymph glands) in the human body which transports the liquid called lymph from the
body tissues to the blood circulatory system is called lymphatic system. Functions of
lymphatic system:
(i) It takes part in the nutritive process of the body.
(ii) It protects the body by killing the germs drained out of the body tissues with the help of
lymphocytes contained in the lymph nodes, by making antibodies.
(iii) It helps in removing the waste products like fragments of dead cells etc.
(b) Blood pressure: The pressure at which the blood is pumped around the body by the heart is
called blood pressure. The two factors which expresses the blood pressure a person are
systolic pressure and diastolic pressure.
(c) Urea is the main nitrogenous waste in human blood. It is removed from the body in the



form of urine through the kidneys.

Question 55:
(a) Name the various organs of the human excretory system.
(b) Draw a neat labelled diagram of the human excretory system.
(c) What is the function of excretory system in humans ?
Solution :
(a) The excretory system of human beings consists of the following main organs: two kidneys,
two ureters, bladder and urethra.

(c) The excretory system removes the poisonous waste substances from the body in the form
of urine and maintains ionic balance called osmoregulation.

Question 56:
(a) Describe the mechanism of urine formation in human excretory system. Draw a labelled
diagram to illustrate your answer.
(b) Where is urine carried through ureters ?
(c) What is urethra ?
Solution :
(a) Urine formation: The dirty blood containing waste like urea enters the glomerulus which
filters the blood. During filtration, the substance like glucose, amino acids, salts, water, urea etc
present in the blood pass into Bowman’s capsule and then enter the tubule of nephron. When
the filtrate containing useful substances as well as the waste substances passes through the
tubule, the useful substances like glucose, amino acids, most salts and water are reabsorbed
into the blood through blood capillaries surrounding the tubule. Only the waste substances like
urea, some unwanted salts and excess water remains behind in the tubule. This yellowish
liquid is called urine.



(b) Urinary bladder.
(c) Urethra is a tube which passes out the urine from the body collected in the urinary bladder.

Question 57:
(a) What is meant by dialysis ? What type of patients are put on dialysis ?
(b) Explain the principle of dialysis with the help of a labelled diagram.
Solution :
(a) Dialysis: The procedure used for cleaning the blood of a person by separating the urea from
it is called dialysis. The patients with kidney failure are put on dialysis. (b) Principle of Dialysis:
The blood from an artery in the patients arm is made to flow into the dialyser of a dialysis
machine made of long tubes of selective permeable membrane (like cellulose) which are coiled
in a tank containing dialysing Solution. The dialysing Solution contains water, glucose and salts
in similar concentrations to those in normal blood. As the patient’s blood passes through the
dialysing Solution most of the waste like urea present in it pass through the selectively
permeable cellulose tubes into the dialysing Solution. The clean blood is pumped back into a
vein of the patients arm.

Question 58:
(a) Why is transport of materials necessary in an organism (plant or animal) ?
(b) What is the need of special tissues or organs for transport of substances in plants and
animals ?
(c) How are water and minerals transported in plants ?
(d) How is food transported in plants ?
Solution :
(a) Transport in organisms (plants and animals) is necessary as it absorbs all essential
substances and transports them to all parts so that they reach each and every cell of the body.
(b) Special tissues and organs are needed for the transport of substances in plants and



animals because these tissues and organs can pick up the essential substances like food,
oxygen, water, etc at one end of their body and carry them to all other parts.
(c) Water and minerals are transported to various parts of the plant by xylem tissues called
xylem vessels and tracheids. Plants take in water from the soil through the roots. The water
containing minerals called cell sap is carried by the xylem vessels to all the parts of the body.
The roots have root hairs to absorb water and minerals from the soil by diffusion and then
pass from cell to cell by osmosis through epidermis, root cortex, endodermis and then reach
the root xylem. The water enters the root xylem into the stem xylem and then reaches the
leaves from the petioles.

(d) Transportation of food in plants: The transport of food from the leaves to other parts of the
plant is called translocation. Phloem tissue transports the food from the leaves to the other
parts of the plant. The movement of food in phloem takes place by utilising energy. The sugar
made in the leaves is loaded into the sieve tubes of phloem by using ATP. Water enters the
sieve tube containing sugar which causes high pressure and pushes the food to all the parts
of the plant having low pressure. This is how the food is transported according to the needs of
the plant.



 Acids,Bases And Salts

Question 1:
What colour do the following indicators turn when added to a base or alkali (such as sodium
hydroxide) ?
(a) methyl orange
(b) litmus
(c) red cabbage extract
Solution :
(a) Yellow.
(b) Blue.
(c) Green.

Question 2:
What colours do the following indicators turn when added to an acid (such as hydrochloric
acid) ?
(a) litmus
(b) methyl orange
Solution :
(a) Red.
(b) Red.

Question 3:
Name an indicator which is red in acid solution but turns blue in basic solution.
Solution :
Litmus.

Question 4:
Name an indicator which is pink in alkaline solution but turns colourless in acidic solution.
Solution :
Phenolphthalein.
Base.

Question 5:
When a solution is added to a cloth strip treated with onion extract, then the smell of onion
cannot be detected. State whether the given solution contains an acid or a base.
Solution :
Base.



Question 6:
When a solution is added to vanilla extract, then the characteristic smell of vanilla cannot be
detected. State whether the given solution is an acid or a base.
Solution :
When Hydrochloric acid reacts with an active metal (like zinc), we observe that gas filled
bubbles are formed on the surface of the metal. Pass the gas formed through soap solution.
Then, bring a burning candle near the gas filled soap bubble. If the gas present in bubble burns
with a ‘pop’ sound, then its hydrogen gas.

Question 7:
How will you test for the gas which is liberated when hydrochloric acid reacts with an active
metal ?
Solution :
Carbon dioxide (CO2) gas is evolved during the reaction. We pass this gas through lime water
which turns milky because of the CO2 passing through it. If we keep on passing the gas
through the milky lime water, it would become clear again.

Question 8:
Name the gas evolved when dilute HCl reacts with sodium hydrogencarbonate. How is it
recognised ?
Solution :
Hydrochloric acid
(HCl) and Sulphuric acid (H2SO4) are strong acids.
Acetic acid (CH3COOH)
and Citric acid (C6H8O7) are weak acids.

Question 9:
Give the names and formulae of two strong acids and two weak acids.
Solution :
(a) Citric acid – Lemon.
(b) Oxalic acid – Tomatoes.
(c) Lactic acid – Sour milk or curd.
(d) Tartaric acid – Tamarind.

Question 10:
Name one natural source of each of the following acids :
(a) Citric acid
(b) Oxalic acid
(c) Lactic acid
(d) Tartaric acid
Solution :
Ant sting and Nettle leaf sting.

Question 11:
Name one animal and one plant whose stings contain formic acid (or methanoic acid).
Solution :

+



On diluting an acid,the concentration of hydronium ions (H O+
3 ) in it decreases.

Question 12:
How is the concentration of hydronium ions (H +

3O ) affected when the solution of an acid is
diluted ?
Solution :
On diluting an acid,the concentration of hydronium ions (H +

3O ) in it decreases.

Question 13:
Write word equations and then balanced equations for the reactions taking place when :
(a) dilute sulphuric acid reacts with zinc granules.
(b) dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with magnesium ribbon.
(c) dilute sulphuric acid reacts with aluminium powder.
(d) dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with iron filings.
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:67

Question 14:
Complete and balance the following chemical equations :
(a) Zn (s) + HCl (aq) ——- >
(b) Na2C03 (s) + HCl (aq) ———>
(c) NaHC03 (s) + HCl (aq) ——–>
(d) NaOH (aq) + HCl (aq) ———>
(e) CuO(s) + HCl (aq) ———->

Solution :

Question :15
Fill in the blanks in the following sentences :
(a) Acids have a…………….. taste and they turn…………… litmus to……………….
(b) Substances do not show their acidic properties without……………….
(c) Acids produce…………… ions on dissolving in water.
(d) Those substances whose smell (or odour) changes in acidic or basic solutions are called
(e) Onion and vanilla extract are…………..
Solution :
(a) Sour; blue; bed.
(b) Water.
(c) Hydrogen.
(d) Olfactory.



(e) Olfactory.

Question 16:
(a) What is an indicator ? Name three common indicators.
(b) Name the acid-base indicator extracted from lichen.
(c) What colour does the turmeric paper turn when put in an alkaline solution ?
Solution :
(a) An indicator is a ‘dye’ that changes colour when it is put in an acid or a base. The three
most common indicators are: Litmus, Methyl orange and Phenolphthalein.
(b) Litmus.
(c) Red.

Question 17:
What is an olfactory indicator ? Name two olfactory indicators. What is the effect of adding
sodium hydroxide solution to these olfactory indicators ?
Solution :
Those substances
whose smell (or odour) changes in acidic or basic solutions are called olfactory indicators.
Onion and vanilla extracts are olfactory indicators. When a basic solution like sodium
hydroxide solution is added to a cloth
strip treated with onions (or onion extract), then the onion smell cannot be detected.

Question 18:
(a) What happens when an acid reacts with a metal ? Give chemical equation of the reaction
involved.
(b) Which gas is usually liberated when an acid reacts with a metal ? How will you test for the
presence of this gas ?
Solution :
(a) When an acid reacts with a metal, then a salt and hydrogen gas are formed.

(b) Hydrogen gas is liberated when an acid reacts with a metal. When reaction between an
acid and a metal occurs, we observe formation of gas bubbles. When these gas bubbles are
passed through soap solution, gas filled soap bubbles rise into the air. When a burning candle
is brought near a gas-filled soap bubble, the gas present in the soap-bubble burns with a ‘pop’
sound. Only hydrogen gas burns making a ‘pop’ sound. This shows that hydrogen gas is
evolved in the process.

Question 19:
While diluting an acid, why is it recommended that the acid should be added to water and not
water to the acid ?
Solution :
When a concentrated acid is added to water for preparing a dilute acid, then the heat is
evolved gradually and easily absorbed by the large amount of water (to which the acid is being
added) however if water is added to concentrated acid, then large amount of heat is evolved at
once. This heat changes some of the water to steam explosively which can splash the acid on
our face or clothes and causeacid burns. Even the glass container may break due to the
excessive heating.

Question 20:
What happens when an acid reacts with a metal hydrogencarbonate ? Write equation of the



reaction which takes place.
Solution :
When an acid reacts with a metal hydrogen carbonate, then a salt, carbon dioxide gas and
water are formed.

Question 21:
(a) What happens when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to sodium carbonate ? Write a
balanced chemical
equation of the reaction involved.
(b) Which gas is liberated when dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium carbonate ? How
will you test for the presence of this gas ?
Solution :
(a) When dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium carbonate, then sodium chloride, carbon
dioxide and water are formed.

(b) CO2 gas is liberated during the reaction.
When carbon dioxide gas formed in the form of brisk effervescence is passed through lime
water, it turns the lime water milky. If excess of carbon dioxide gas is passed through the milky
lime water, the solution becomes clear again. This confirms the presence of carbon dioxide
gas.

Question 22:
What happens when an acid reacts with a base ? Explain by taking the example of hydrochloric
acid and sodium hydroxide. Give equation of the chemical reaction which takes place. What is
the special name of such a reaction ?
Solution :
When an acid reacts with a base, then a salt and water are formed. When hydrochloric acid
reacts with sodium hydroxide solution, then a neutralisation reaction takes place to form
sodium chloride and water.

Such a reaction is termed as neutralisation reaction.

Question 23:
What happens when an acid reacts with a metal oxide ? Explain with the help of an example.
Write a balanced equation for the reaction involved.
Solution :
Acids react with metal oxides to form salt and water.
For example: Copper (II) Oxide, a metal oxide reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to form
copper chloride and water

Question 24:
(a) What are organic acids and mineral acids ?
(b) Give two examples each of organic acids and mineral acids.
(c) State some of the uses of mineral acids in industry.
Solution :
(a) Organic acids are acids present in plant materials and animals. These are naturally
occuring acids.



A mineral acid (or inorganic acid) is an acid derived from one or more minerals of the earth.
(b) Organic acids: Citric acid, lactic acid;
Mineral acids: Hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid.
(c) Uses of mineral acids in industry:

1.  Sulphuric acid is used in the manufacture of fertilizers, paints, dyes, detergents etc.
2.  Nitric acid is used for making fertilizers, explosives, dyes and plastics.
3.  Hydrochloric acid is used for removing oxide film from steel objects, in textile, food and

leather industries.

Question 25:
What is meant by strong acids and weak acids ? Classify the following into strong acids and
weak acids :
HCl,   CH3COOH,   H2SO4,  HNO3,   H2CO3,   H2SO3
Solution :
A strong acid is one that completely ionises in water to form a large amount of hydrogen ions
whereas a weak acid only partially ionises in water and thus produces a small amount of
hydrogen ions.
HCl, H2SO4, HNO3 are strong acids; CH3COOH, H2CO3, H2SO3 are weak acids.

Question 26:
Why do HCl, H2SO4, HNO3, etc., show acidic character in aqueous solutions while solutions of
compounds like C6H12O6 (glucose) and C2H5OH (alcohol) do not show acidic character ?
Solution :
The acidic character of a substance is due to the presence of hydrogen ions [H+(aq) ions] in its
aqueous solution. HCl, H2SO4 etc show acidic properties because they produce hydrogen ions
when dissolved in water. The solution of compounds like alcohol and glucose do not show
acidic character because they do not ionize in water to produce hydrogen ions or any other
ions in solution.

Question 27:
What is a neutralisation reaction ? Explain with an example. Give the chemical equation of the
reaction which takes place.
Solution :
The reaction between an acid and a base to form salt and water is called a neutralisation
reaction. When hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium hydroxide solution, then a neutralisation
reaction takes place to form sodium chloride and water.

Question 28:
Why should curd and other sour foodstuffs (like lemon juice, etc.) not be kept in metal
containers (such as copper and brass vessels) ?
Solution :
Curd and other sour substances contains acids which can react with the metals of brass and
copper vessels to form toxic (poisonous) metal compounds which can cause food poisoning
and damage our health.

Question 29:
(a) What is produced if an acid is added to a base ?
(b) Why does dry HCl gas not change the colour of dry litmus paper ?
(c) What colour does phenolphthalein indicator turn when added to an alkali (such as sodium
hydroxide) ?



Solution :
(a) Salt and water.
(b) Because dry HCl gas has no hydrogen ions (H+ ions) in it which can impart acidic
properties to it.
(c) Pink.

Question 30:
(a) Why do acids not show acidic behaviour in the absence of water ?
(b) Why does an aqueous solution of an acid conduct electricity ?
(c) Why does distilled water not conduct electricity whereas rain water does ?
Solution :
(a) The acidic behavior of an acid is due to the presence of hydrogen ions [H+ (aq) ions] which
are produced only when acids are dissolved in water. In the absence of water, acids do not
produce hydrogen ions and hence do not show acidic behavior.
(b) The aqueous solution of an acid conducts electricity due to the presence of charged
particles called ‘ions’ in it. These ions carry electric current.
(c) Distilled water does not conduct electricity because it does not contain any ionic
compounds dissolved in it whereas rain water does.
Reason: When rain water falls on earth through the atmosphere, it dissolves an acidic gas
‘carbon dioxide’ from the air and forms carbonic acid (H2CO3). The carbonic acid provides
some hydrogen and carbonate ions to the rain water. Due to the presence of these ions, rain
water conducts electricity.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:68

Question 31:
(a) What happens when an acid reacts with a metal carbonate ? Explain with the help of an
example. Write
chemical equation of the reaction involved.
(b) What happens when carbon dioxide gas is passed through lime water :
(i) for a short time ?
(ii) for a considerable time ?
Write equations of the reactions involved.
Solution :
(a) When an acid reacts with a metal carbonate, then a salt, carbon dioxide and water are
produced.
Example: When dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium carbonate, then sodium chloride,
carbon dioxide and water are formed.

Question 32:
With the help of labelled diagrams, describe an activity to show that acids produce ions only in
aqueous solutions.
Solution :
Activity:
Take about 1g solid NaCl in a clean and dry test tube and add some concentrated sulphuric



acid to it. Fit a rubber cork with a small delivery tube in the mouth of the test tube.
Concentrated sulphuric acid reacts with sodium chloride to form hydrogen chloride gas. The
hydrogen chloride gas starts coming out of the open end of the glass tube.

Now, hold a ‘dry’ blue litmus paper in HCl gas. There is no change in colour of the ‘dry’ blue
litmus paper. This shows that HCl gas does not behave as an acid in the absence of water.
However, when we hold a ‘moist’ blue litmus paper in HCl gas, we will see that the ‘moist’ blue
litmus paper turns red. This indicates that HCl gas shows acidic behavior in the presence of
water as hydrogen ions are formed. This proves that acids produce ions only in aqueous
solutions or in presence of water.

Question 33:
(a) Which element is common to all acids ?
(b) Compounds such as alcohol and glucose also contain hydrogen but are not categorised as
acids. Describe an activity to prove it.
Solution :
(a) Hydrogen.
(b) Activity:
Take solutions of glucose, alcohol, hydrochloric acid and sulphuric acid. Fix two nails on a
cork, and place the cork in a 100 ml beaker. Connect the nails to the two terminals of a 6 volt
battery through a bulb and a switch. Now pour some dilute HCl in the beaker and switch on the
current. The bulb starts glowing. This shows that HCl solution taken in the beaker conducts
electricity. If we replace hydrochloric acid with sulphuric acid and perform the experiment, the
bulb would glow again. This shows that an aqueous solution of an acid conducts electricity
due to the presence of charged particles called ions in it.

Now, if we take glucose solution in the beaker and switch on the current, the bulb would not
glow. If we repeat the experiment by taking alcohol solution in the beaker, the bulb would not
glow again. This shows that due to the absence of ions, glucose and alcohol solutions do not
conduct electricity. From this activity, we conclude that the hydrogen containing compounds
such as glucose and alcohol are not categorised as acids because they do not dissociate (or
ionise) in water to produce hydrogen ions [H+(aq) ions].

Question 44:
When a piece of limestone reacts with dilute HCl, a gas X is produced. When gas X is passed
through lime water then a white precipitate Y is formed. On passing excess of gas X, the white
precipitate dissolves forming a soluble compound Z.
(a) What are X, Y and Z ?



(b) Write equations for the reactions which take place :

1. when limestone reacts with dilute HCl
2. when gas X reacts with lime water to form white precipitate Y
3. when excess of gas X dissolves white precipitate Y to form a soluble compound Z

Solution :
(a) X is carbon dioxide; Y is calcium carbonate; Z is calcium hydrogen carbonate.

Question 45:
If someone is suffering from the problem of acidity after overeating, which of the following
would you suggest as remedy ?
Lemon juice, Vinegar, Baking soda solution Give reason for your choice.
Solution :
Baking soda solution. Being basic in nature, it neutralises excess acid in the stomach.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:69

Question 46:
On adding dilute hydrochloric acid to copper oxide powder, the solution formed is blue-green.
(a) Predict the new compound formed which imparts a blue-green colour to solution.
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation of the reaction which takes place.
(c) On the basis of the above reaction, what can you say about the nature of copper oxide ?
Solution :
(a) Copper (II)
chloride, CuCl2

(c) Copper oxide is basic in nature

Question 47:
A white shirt has a yellow stain of curry. When soap is rubbed on this shirt during washing, the
yellow stain turns reddish-brown. On rinsing the shirt with plenty of water, the reddish-brown
stain turns yellow again.
(a) Name the natural indicator present in curry stain.
(b) Explain the changes in colour of this indicator which take place during washing and rinsing
the shirt.
(c) What is the nature of soap (acidic/basic) as shown by the indicator present in curry stain ?
Solution :
(a) Turmeric.
(b) The yellow stain of curry turns reddish-brown when soap is scrubbed on it because of the
fact that soap solution is basic in nature which changes the colour of turmeric in the curry
stain to red-brown. This stain turns yellow again when the cloth is rinsed with water because
then the basic soap gets removed with water.
(c) Basic.

Question 48:
You have been provided with three test-tubes. One of these test-tubes contains distilled water
and the other two contain an acidic and a basic solution respectively. If you are given only blue
litmus paper, how will you identify the contents of each test-tube ?



Solution :
Acidic
solution will turn blue litmus red; This red litmus will turn blue in basic solution; Distilled water
will have no effect on any type of litmus paper.

Question 49:
A substance X which is used as an antacid reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to produce a
gas Y which is used in one type of fire-extinguisher. Name the substance X and gas Y. Write a
balanced equation for the chemical reaction which takes place.
Solution :
Substance X is sodium hydrogen carbonate; Gas Y is carbon dioxide.

Question 50:
How is the neutralisation of a carbonate with an acid different from the neutralisation of an
oxide or a hydroxide ?
Solution :
Neutralisation of a carbonate with an acid produces carbon dioxide gas but not with an oxide
or hydroxide.

Question 51:
What happens to (a) the H+ ions, and (b) temperature of the solution, when an acid is
neutralised ?
Solution :
(a) H+ ions of acid combine with OH– ions of alkali to form water, H2O.
(b) Temperature of the solution rises.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:79

Question 1:
Name the gas evolved when zinc granules are treated/heated with :
(a) hydrochloric acid solution
(b) sodium hydroxide solution
Solution :
(a) Hydrogen
(b) Hydrogen

Question 2:
What is the common name of water soluble bases ?
Solution :
Alkalis

Question 3:
What is common in all the water soluble bases (or alkalis) ?
Solution :
They all produce hydroxide ions when dissolved in water.

Question 4:
Why does tooth decay start when the pH of mouth is lower than 5.5 ?
Solution :
Tooth decay start when the pH of mouth is lower than 5.5 because the acid becomes strong
enough to attack the enamel of the teeth and corrode it.



Question 5:
What is the pH of a neutral solution ?
Solution :
7

Question 6:
Which is more acidic : a solution of pH = 2 or a solution of pH = 6 ?
Solution :
Solution of pH = 2 is more acidic.

Question 7:
Which is more basic (or more alkaline) : a solution of pH = 8 or a solution of pH = 11 ?
Solution :
Solution of pH = 11

Question 8:
Name the scientist who developed the pH scale.
Solution :
Sorenson

Question 9:
Name the indicator which can give us an idea of how strong or weak an acid or base is.
Solution :
Universal indicator

Question 10:
The pH of soil A is 7.5 while that of soil B is 4.5. Which of the two soils, A or B, should be
treated with powdered chalk to adjust its pH and why ?
Solution :
Soil B. Soil B is acidic in nature so its treated with powdered chalk to reduce its acidity.

Question 11:
What is the name of the indicator which can be used for testing the pH of a solution ?
Solution :
Universal indicator

Question 12:
What colour will universal indicator show if you add it to the following substances ?
(a) potassium hydroxide, pH = 12
(b) soda water, pH = 5
(c) sulphuric acid, pH = 2
Solution :
(a) Dark Purple
(b) Orange Yellow
(c) Red

Question 13:
A beaker of concentrated hydrochloric acid has a pH of 1. What colour will full range universal
indicator turn if it is added to this beaker ? Is it a strong or a weak acid ?
Solution :
pH = 1 will turn the scale red; strong acid.



Question 14:
Two solutions X and Y are tested with universal indicator. Solution X turns orange whereas
solution Y turns red. Which of the solutions is a stronger acid ?
Solution :
Solution Y is a stronger acid.

Question 15:
Two solutions A and B have pH values of 3.0 and 9.5 respectively. Which of these will turn
litmus solution from blue to red and which will turn phenolphthalein from colourless to pink ?
Solution :
Solution A (pH = 3.0) will turn litmus from solution blue to red Solution B (pH = 9.5) will turn
phenolphthalein from colourless to pink.

Question 16:
Two drinks P and Q gave acidic and alkaline reactions, respectively. One has a pH value of 9
and the other has a pH value of 3. Which drink has the pH value of 9 ?
Solution :
Drink Q has a pH value of 9.

Question 17:
Two solutions X and Y have pH = 4 and pH = 8, respectively. Which solution will give alkaline
reaction and which one acidic ?
Solution :
Alkaline reaction: Solution Y (pH = 8)
Acidic reaction: Solution X (pH = 4)

Question 18:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Acids have a pH………… than 7.
(b) Alkalis have a pH………. than 7.
(c) Neutral substances have a pH of……………
(d) The more acidic a solution, the………………. the pH.
(e) The more alkaline a solution, the…………… the pH.
Solution :
(a) Lower.
(b) Higher.
(c) 7.
(d) Lower.
(e) Higher.

Question 19:
Fresh milk has a pH of 6. When it changes into curd (yogurt), will its pH value increase or
decrease ? Why ?
Solution :
pH value will decrease when milk changes to curd. Curd contains lactic acid hence the pH
decreases.

Question 20:
(a) What is a universal indicator ? For what purpose is it used ?
(b) How does a universal indicator work ?
(c) Water is a neutral substance. What colour will you get when you add a few drops of
universal indicator to a test-tube containing water ?



Solution :
(a) Universal indicator is a mixture of many different indicators which gives different colours at
different pH values of the entire pH scale. It is used to obtain an idea of how acidic or basic a
substance is.
(b) When an acid or base solution is added to the universal indicator, it produces a new colour
which is used to find the pH value of the acid or the base solution by matching the colour with
the colours on pH colour chart.
(c) Green colour.

Question 21:
Which chemical is injected into the skin of a person :
(a) during an ant’s sting ?
(b) during the nettle leaf hair sting ?
How can the effect of these stings be neutralised ?
Solution :
(a) Methanoic acid.
(b) Methanoic acid.The effect of methanoic acid can be neutralised by rubbing a mild base like
baking soda solution on the stung area of the skin.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:80

Question 22:
(a) Explain the pH change as the cause of tooth decay. How can tooth decay caused by pH
change be
prevented ?
(b) Explain how pH change in the lake water can endanger the lives of aquatic animals (like
fish). What can be done to lessen the danger to the lives of aquatic animals in the lake ?
Solution :
(a) Tooth decay starts when the pH of the acid formed in the mouth falls below 5.5 because
the acid becomes strong enough to attack the enamel of the teeth and corrode it. (b) The pH of
lake water becomes lower because of too much acid rain. The high acidity of lake water can kill
the aquatic animals like fish since they can survive within a narrow range of pH change.
Calcium carbonate is added to acidic lake water to neutralise the acid and this prevents the
fish from being killed.

Question 23:
(a) What happens during a bee sting ? What is its remedy ?
(b) What happens during a wasp sting ? What is its remedy ?
Solution :
(a) When a bee stings a person, it injects an acidic liquid into the skin which causes immense
pain and irritation. Its remedy is to rub a mild base like baking soda solution on the stung are
of the skin.
(b) When a wasp stings, it injects an alkaline liquid into the skin. Rubbing a mild acid like
vinegar on the stung area of the skin gives relief.

Question 24:
(a) Why is it wrong to treat a bee sting with vinegar ?
(b) Why is it wrong to treat a wasp sting with baking soda solution ?
Solution :
(a) Since vinegar is acetic acid so it can’t be used to treat bee sting because bee injects acid
into the skin.
(b) Since baking soda is basic in nature so it can’t be used to treat wasp sting because wasp



injects alkaline liquid into the skin.

Question 25:
(a) What does the pH of a solution signify ? Three solutions A, B and C have pH values of 6, 4
and 10
respectively. Which of the solutions is highly acidic ?
(b) A farmer has found that the pH of soil in his fields is 4.2. Name any two chemical materials
which he can mix with the soil to adjust its pH.
Solution :
(a) pH of a solution signifies the concentration of hydrogen ions in it. Solution B is highly acidic
since it has the lowest pH (pH = 4).
(b) Slaked lime or Chalk can be used to treat acidic soil.

Question 26:
(a) The pH values of six solutions A to F are given below :
A = 0, B = 11, C = 6, D = 3, E = 13, F = 8
Which of the above solutions are (i) acids (ii) alkalis ?
(b) Name the acids or alkalis used to make (i) car batteries (ii) explosives (iii) soaps (iv)
fertilisers.
Solution :
(a) (i) Acids; A, C and D.
(ii) Alkalis; B, E and F.
(b) (i)Sulphuric acid.
(ii) Sulphuric acid.
(iii) Sodium hydroxide.
(iv) Nitric acid.

Question 27:
(a) The pH of a cold drink is 5. What will be its action on blue and red litmus solutions ?
(b) The pH values of three acids A, B and C having equal molar concentrations are 5.0,2.8 and
3.5 respectively. Arrange these acids in order of the increasing acid strengths.
Solution :
(a) The cold drink turns blue litmus red because of its acidic nature. It will have no action on
red litmus.
(b) A < C < B.B will have maximum acid strength because pH is inversely proportional to
concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution.

Question 28:
Under what soil conditions do you think a farmer would treat the soil of his fields with
quicklime (calcium oxide), Or slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) or chalk (calcium carbonate) ?
Solution :
When the soil is too acidic, it is treated with bases like quicklime or slaked lime or chalk.

Question 29:
Which acid is produced in our stomach ? What happens if there is an excess of acid in the
stomach ? How can its effect be cured ?
Solution :
Our stomach produces hydrochloric acid. If there is excess of hydrochloric acid in the
stomach, it causes indigestion which produces pain and irritation. Its effect can be cured by
taking antacids.

Question 30:



The soil in a field is highly acidic. Name two materials which can be added to this soil to
reduce its acidity. Give the reason for your choice.
Solution :
If the soil is too acidic, then it can be treated with materials like quicklime or slaked lime as
these materials are bases and hence react with the excess acids present in the soil to reduce
its acidity.

Question 31:
What is meant by strong bases and weak bases ? Classify the following into strong bases and
weak bases :
NH4OH, Ca(OH)2, NaOH, KOH, Mg(OH)2
Solution :
Strong base: A base which completely ionises in water and produces a large amount of
hydroxide ions.
Weak base: A base which is partially ionised in water and produces a small amount of
hydroxide ions.
Strong bases: NaOH , KOH
Weak bases : NH4OH , Ca(OH)2, Mg(OH)2

Question 32:
What ions are present in the solutions of following substances ? (write the symbols only)

1. Hydrochloric acid
2. Nitric acid
3. Sulphuric acid
4. Sodium hydroxide
5. Potassium hydroxide
6. Magnesium hydroxide

Solution :

1. H+, Cl –

2. H+, NO 2-
3

3. H+, SO 2-
4

4. Na+, OH–

5. K+, OH–

6. Mg2+, OH–

Question 33:
(a) What would you expect the pH of pure water to be ?
(b) What colour would the universal indicator show in an aqueous solution of sugar ? Why ?
(c) A sample of rain water turned universal indicator paper yellow. What would you expect its
pH to be ? Is it a strong or a weak acid ?
Solution :
(a) pH of pure water = 7
(b) Aqueous solution of sugar will turn the color of universal indicator green because sugar
solution is neutral in nature.
(c) pH of the sample of rain water will be between 5 and 6. It is a weak acid.

Question 34:
(a) What do you think will be the pH in the stomach of a person suffering from indigestion :
less than 7 or



more than 7 ?
(b) What do you think will be the pH of an antacid solution : less than 7 or more than 7 ?
(c) How does an antacid work ?
(d) Name two common antacids.
Solution :
(a) The pH in the stomach of a person suffering from indigestion will be l ess than 7 since
indigestion is caused due to formation of excess acid in the stomach.
(b) Antacids are a group of mild bases so they have pH more than 7.
(c) Antacids react with excess acid in the stomach and neutralise it.
(d) Antacids: Magnesium hydroxide and Sodium hydrogencarbonate.

Question 35:
Separate the following into substances having pH values above and below 7. How do these
influence litmus paper ?

1. Lemon juice
2. Solution of washing soda
3. Toothpaste
4. Vinegar
5. Stomach juices

Solution :
Substances having pH values above 7: Solution of washing soda and toothpaste; They will turn
red litmus paper blue due to their basic nature.
Substances having pH values less than 7: Lemon juice, vinegar and stomach juices; They will
turn blue litmus paper red due to their acidic nature.

Question 36:
(a) Do basic solutions also have H+ (aq) ions ? If yes, then why are they basic ?
(b) When a solution becomes more acidic, does the pH get higher or lower ?
Solution :
(a) Yes, all basic solutions have H+ ions. They are basic because the concentration of
hydrogen ions is much less than that of hydroxide ions.
(b) When a solution becomes more acidic, pH gets lower.

Question 37:
(a) Define an acid and a base. Give two examples of each.
(b) Give the names and formulae of two strong bases and two weak bases.
(c) What type of ions are formed :
(i) when an acid is dissolved in water ?
(ii) when a base (or alkali) is dissolved in water ?
(d) Write the neutralisation reaction between acids and bases in terms of the ions involved.
(e) Write any two important uses of bases.
Solution :
(a) Acids are those chemical substances which have a sour taste. Example: Acetic acid and
citric acid.
Base is a chemical substance which has a bitter taste. Example: Caustic soda and washing
soda.
(b) Strong bases – Sodium hydroxide, NaOH , potassium hydroxide (KOH).
Weak bases – Calcium hydroxide, Ca( OH2), ammonium hydroxide, NH4OH.
(c) ( i ) Hydrogen ions.
(ii) Hydroxide ions.



(e) Uses of bases:
(i) Sodium hydroxide is used in the manufacture of soap, paper and rayon.
(ii) Calcium hydroxide is used in the manufacture of bleaching powder.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:81

Question 38:
(a) What happens when zinc granules are heated with sodium hydroxide solution ? Write
equation of the
reaction which takes place.
(b) What happens when bases react with non-metal oxides ? Explain with the help of an
example. What does this reaction tell us about the nature of non-metal oxides ?
Solution :
(a) When zinc granules are heated with sodium hydroxide solution, then sodium zincate salt
and hydrogen gas are formed.

Question 39:
(a) What effect does the concentration of H+ (aq) ions have on the nature of a solution ?
(b) What effect does the concentration of H– ions have on the nature of a solution ?
(c) Someone put some universal indicator paper into vinegar. The pH is 3. What does this tell
you about the vinegar ?
(d) Someone put some universal indicator paper onto wet soap. The pH is 8. What does this
tell you about the soap ?
(e) State whether a solution is acidic, alkaline or neutral if its pH is :
(i) 9 (ii) 4 (iii) 7 (iv) 1 (v) 10 (vi) 3
Solution :
(a) As the concentration of hydrogen ions increases, the solution becomes more acidic.
(b) As the concentration of hydroxide ions increases, the solution becomes more basic.
(c) Vinegar is acidic in nature.
(d) Soap is basic in nature.
(e) ( i ) pH = 9 : Alkaline.
(ii) pH = 4 : Acidic.
(iii) pH = 7 : Neutral.
(iv) pH = 1 : Acidic.
(v) pH = 10 : Alkaline.
(vi) pH = 3 : Acidic.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:82

Question 54:
A milkman adds a very small amount of baking soda to fresh milk.
(a) Why does he shift the pH of the fresh milk from 6 to slightly alkaline ?



(b) Why does this milk take a long time to set as curd ?
Solution :
(a) Milk is made slightly alkaline so that it may not become sour easily due to the formation of
lactic acid in it.
(b) The alkaline milk takes a longer time to set into curd because the lactic acid being formed
has to first neutralise the alkali present in it.

Question 55:
Which of the following elements would form oxides which would indicate pH values less than
seven, using moist pH paper ?
Magnesium, Carbon, Sulphur, Hydrogen , Copper
Solution :
Carbon and Sulphur being non-metals form acidic oxides.

Question 56:
The pH values of five solutions A, B, C, D and E are given below :
A             1
B             5
C             7
D             11
E             13

Which solution is

1. weakly alkaline
2. neutral
3. strongly acidic
4. strongly alkaline, and
5. weakly acidic ?

Solution :

1. Weakly alkaline: D (pH = 11)
2. Neutral : C (pH = 7)
3. Strongly acidic: A (pH = 1)
4. Strongly alkaline: E (pH = 13)
5. Weakly acidic : B (pH = 5)

Question 57:
Potatoes grow well on Anhad’s farm which has soil with a pH of 5.5. Anhad decides to add lot
of lime to soil so that he can grow broccoli in the same farm :
(a) Do potatoes grow better in acidic or alkaline soil ?
(b) Does broccoli grow better in acidic or alkaline soil ?
Solution :
(a) Potatoes grow better in acidic soil having pH = 5.5
(b) Broccoli grows better in a lkaline soil since adding a lot of lime to acidic soil will make it
basic in nature.

Question 58:
Here are some results of solutions tested with universal indicator paper :
Sulphuric acid : Red
Metal polish : Dark blue



Washing-up liquid : Yellow
Milk of magnesia : Light blue
Oven cleaner : Purple
Car battery acid : Pink
Arrange the solutions in order of their increasing pH values (starting with the one with the
lowest pH).
Solution :
Sulphuric acid < car battery acid < washing up liquid < milk of magnesia < metal polish < oven
cleaner since:
Red : pH = 1
Pink : pH = 3-4
Yellow: pH = 5-6
Light blue : pH = 9
Dark blue : pH = 10
Purple: pH = 11

Question 59:
Solution A turns universal indicator blue to purple whereas solution B turns universal indicator
orange to red.
(a) What will be the action of solution A on litmus ?
(b) What will be action of solution B on litmus ?
(c) Name any two substances which can give solutions like A.
(d) Name any two substances which can give solutions like B.
(e) What sort of reaction takes place when solution A reacts with solution B ?
Solution :
(a) Solution A turns universal indicator blue to purple so it is basic in nature and will turn litmus
blue.
(b) Solution B turns universal indicator orange to red so it is acidic in nature and will turn
litmus red.
(c) Milk of magnesia and sodium hydroxide solution are bases like solution A.
(d) Lemon juice and hydrochloric acid are acids like solution B.
(e) Neutralisation reaction.

Question 60:
A first-aid manual suggests that vinegar should be used to treat wasp stings and baking soda
for bee stings. What does this information tell you about the chemical nature of:
(a) wasp stings ?
(b) bee stings ?
Solution :
(a) Wasp stings are alkaline in nature since they are treated using acids like vinegar.
(b) Bee stings are acidic in nature since they are treated using bases like baking soda.

Question 61:
(a) Explain why the pH in a person’s mouth becomes lower after each meal.
(b) What damage could be caused while the pH is low ?
(c) How could the person change his eating habits to lessen chances of suffering from tooth
decay ?
Solution :
(a) T he pH in a person’s mouth becomes lower after each meal because bacteria present in
the mouth breaks down the sugar to form acids.
(b) If the pH is low, the tooth starts decaying.
(c) A person can lessen the chances of suffering from tooth decay by changing his eating



habits such as eating less of sugary foods like ice-creams, candies, sweets etc.

Question 62:
A group of students measured the pH of some substances they found in their homes. Their
results are given in the following table :

(a) What would the students have used to measure the pH ?
(b) Which solution is the most acidic
(c) Which solution is the most alkaline ?
(d) Which solutions are neutral ?
(e) Which solution can be used to treat wasp stings ?
(f) Which solution can be used to treat bee stings ?
Solution :
(a) Universal indicator paper is used to measure the pH.
(b) Lemon juice with pH = 2.5 is the most acidic.
(c) Household ammonia with pH = 12 is the most alkaline.
(d) Salt solution and sugar solution with pH = 7 are neutral.
(e) Vinegar (acid) can be used to treat wasp stings since it injects an alkaline liquid into the
skin.
(f) Baking soda can be used to treat bee stings since it injects methanoic acid into the skin.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:83

Question 63:
Hydrochloric acid reacts with a metal X to form a gas Y which bums with a ‘pop’ sound.
Sodium hydroxide solution also reacts with the same metal X (on heating) to form the same
gas Y.
(a) Name X and Y
(b) Write the chemical equation of the reaction of metal X with  (i) hydrochloric acid, and (ii)
sodium hydroxide solution.
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:96

Question 1:
What is the chemical formula of (a) baking soda, and (b) washing soda ?
Solution :
(a) NaHCO3.
(b) Na2CO3.



Question 2:
Write the chemical formula of (i) soda ash, and (ii) sodium carbonate decahydrate.
Solution :
(i) Na2CO3.
(ii) Na2CO3.10H2O.

Question 3:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Copper sulphate crystals are always wet due to the presence of water of crystallisation in
them.
Solution :
False.

Question 4:
Which of the following salt has a blue colour and why ?
CuSO4.5H2O or CuSO4
Solution :
CuSO4.5H2O
has blue colour due to the presence of water of crystallization.

Question 5:
What would be the colour of litmus in a solution of sodium carbonate ?
Solution :
Blue.

Question 6:
State the common and chemical names of the compound formed when plaster of Paris is
mixed with water.
Solution :
The common name is Gypsum and the chemical name is calcium sulphate dihydrate.

Question 7:
With which substance should chlorine be treated to get bleaching powder ?
Solution :
Calcium hydroxide.

Question 8:
What is the commercial name of calcium sulphate hemihydrate ?
Solution :
Plaster of Paris.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:97

Question 9:
Name the product formed when Cl2 and H2 produced during the electrolysis of brine are made
to combine.
Solution :
Hydrochloric acid.

Question 10:
Name a calcium compound which hardens on wetting with water.
Solution :



Plaster of Paris

Question 11:
Name a sodium compound which is a constituent of many dry soap powders.
Solution :
Sodium carbonate.

Question 12:
Name a metal carbonate which is soluble in water.
Solution :
Sodium carbonate.

Question 13:
Name an acid which is present in baking powder.
Solution :
Tartaric acid.

Question 14:
Name the metal whose carbonate is known as washing soda.
Solution :
Sodium.

Question 15:
Which compound is used as an antacid in medicine : NaHCO3 or Na2CO3 ?
Solution :
NaHCO3.

Question 16:
What is the common name of (a) NaHCO3 and (b) Na2CO3.10H2O ?
Solution :
(a) Baking soda.
(b) Washing soda.

Question 17:
Write the chemical name and formula of (a) common salt, and (b) caustic soda.
Solution :
(a) Sodium chloride- NaCl.
(b) Sodium hydroxide- NaOH.

Question 18:
What are the two main ways in which common salt (sodium chloride) occurs in nature ?
Solution :
Common salt occurs naturally in sea water and as rock salt.

Question 19:
Name the major salt present in sea-water.
Solution :
Sodium chloride.

Question 20:
How is common salt obtained from sea-water ?
Solution :



Common salt is obtained from sea water by the process of evaporation.

Question 21:
Why is sodium chloride required in our body ?
Solution :
Sodium chloride is required in our body for the working of nervous system, the movement of
muscles, and the production of hydrochloric acid in the stomach.

Question 22:
Name three chemicals made from common salt (or sodium chloride).
Solution :
Sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogencarbonate.

Question 23:
Give any two uses of common salt (sodium chloride).
Solution :
(a) It is used in the manufacture of soap.
(b) It is used in cooking food.

Question 24:
What name is given to the common salt which is mined from underground deposits ? How
was this salt formed ?
Solution :
Rock salt. It is mined from the underground deposits just like coal.

Question 25:
Name the salt which is used as a preservative in pickles, and in curing meat and fish.
Solution :
Sodium chloride.

Question 26:
Name the raw material used for the production of caustic soda.
Solution :
Sodium chloride.

Question 27:
The electrolysis of an aqueous solution of sodium chloride gives us three products. Name
them.
Solution :
Sodium hydroxide, chlorine and hydrogen.

Question 28:
During the electrolysis of a saturated solution of sodium chloride, where is :
(a) chlorine formed ?
(b) hydrogen formed ?
(c) sodium hydroxide formed ?
Solution :
(a) Anode.
(b) Cathode.
(c) Near the
cathode.



Question 29:
Fill in the following blanks :
(a) Common salt is obtained from sea-water by the process of…………..
(b) Rock salt is mined just like……………….
(c) Chemical formula of washing soda is…………
(d) Sodium hydrogen carbonate is……………………. soda whereas sodium carbonate
is…………………………………
(e) The chemical formula of plaster of Paris is……………
Solution :
(a) Evaporation.
(b) Coal.
(c) Na2CO3.10H2O.
(d) Baking; washing.
(e) CaSO4. ?H2O

Question 30:
Complete and balance the following chemical equations :

Solution :

Question 31:
What is washing soda ? State two properties and two uses of washing soda.
Solution :
Washing soda is
sodium carbonate decahydrate. Properties:
(i) It is transparent crystalline solid.
(ii) It is soluble in water.
Uses:
(i) It is used for removing permanent hardness of water.
(ii) It is used in the manufacture of glass, soap and paper.

Question 32:
Write the formulae of sodium chloride and sodium carbonate. Explain why an aqueous
solution of sodium chloride is neutral but an aqueous solution of sodium carbonate is basic
(or alkaline). Write chemical equations of the reactions involved.
Solution :
Sodium chloride – NaCl.
Sodium carbonate – Na2CO3.
The aqueous solution of sodium chloride is neutral because it is formed from a strong acid
and a strong base. The aqueous solution of sodium carbonate is basic because it gets
hydrolysed to some extent and forms sodium hydroxide which is a strong base and carbonic
acid which is a weak acid.

Question 33:



Write the chemical formula of ammonium chloride. Explain why an aqueous solution of
ammonium chloride is acidic in nature ? Illustrate your answer with the help of a chemical
equation.
Solution :
The chemical formula of ammonium chloride is NH4Cl. Since, ammonium chloride is the salt
of a strong acid HCl and a weak base NH4OH, so an aqueous solution of ammonium chloride
is acidic in nature.
When dissolved in water, it gets hydrolysed to some extent to form HCl and NH4OH. HCl being
a strong acid is fully ionised and gives a large amount of hydrogen ions whereas NH4OH is
only slightly ionised. So, NH4Cl contains more of hydrogen ions than hydroxide ions and is
hence acidic in nature.

Question 34:
What is baking soda ? Write the chemical name of baking soda. Give the important uses of
baking soda. How does baking soda differ chemically from washing soda ?
Solution :
Baking soda is a substance added to food for its faster cooking. Its chemical name is sodium
hydrogen carbonate.
Uses: (i) It is used as an antacid to remove acidity of stomach.
(ii) It is used in fire extinguishers.
Baking soda is sodium hydrogencarbonate whereas washing soda is sodium carbonate
decahydrate.

Question 35:
Describe how sodium hydrogencarbonate (baking soda) is produced on a large scale. Write
equation of the reaction involved.
Solution :
Sodium hydrogencarbonate is produced on large scale by reacting a cold and concentrated
solution of sodium chloride with ammonia and carbon dioxide.

Question 36:
What happens when a cold and concentrated solution of sodium chloride reacts with
ammonia and carbon dioxide ? Write the chemical equation of the reaction which takes place.
Solution :
When a cold and concentrated solution of sodium chloride reacts with ammonia and carbon
dioxide, sodium hydrogencarbonate and ammonium chloride are formed.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:98

Question 37:
(a) What is meant by “water of crystallisation” in a substance ? Explain with an example.
(b) How would you show that blue copper sulphate crystals contain water of crystallisation ?
(c) Explain how anhydrous copper sulphate can be used to detect the presence of moisture
(water) in a liquid.
Solution :
(a) The water molecules which form part of the structure of a crystal are called water of
crystallization.
Example: CuSO4.5H2O
(b) The blue copper sulphate crystals contain water of crystallization as it is blue in colour.



(c) Anhydrous copper sulphate turns blue on adding water. This property of anhydrous copper
sulphate is used to detect the presence of moisture in a liquid.

Question 38:
(a) What is the common name of sodium hydrogencarbonate ?
(b) What happens when a solution of sodium hydrogencarbonate is heated ? Write equation of
the reaction involved.
(c) Explain why, sodium hydrogencarbonate is used as an antacid.
Solution :
(a) Baking soda.
(b) When a solution of sodium hydrogencarbonate is heated, then it decomposes to give
sodium carbonate with the evolution of carbon dioxide gas.

(c) Sodium hydrogencarbonate is used as an antacid because it neutralises the excess acid
present in the stomach and relieves indigestion.

Question 39:
(a) What will happen if heating is not controlled while preparing plaster of Paris ?
(b) Write an equation to show the reaction between plaster of Paris and water.
Solution :
(a) If heating is not controlled while preparing POP, then all the water of crystallisation of
gypsum is eliminated and it turns into a dead burnt plaster.

Question 40:
(a) What happens when copper sulphate crystals are heated strongly ? Explain with the help of
an equation.
(b) What happens when a few drops of water are added to anhydrous copper sulphate ?
Explain with the
help of an equation.
Solution :
(a) On strong heating, blue copper sulphate crystals turn white.

Question 41:
(a) Name two constituents of baking powder.
(b) How does baking powder differ from baking soda ?
(c) Explain the action of baking powder in the making of cake (or bread). Write equation of the
reaction involved.
Solution :
(a)Sodium hydrogencarbonate and tartaric acid.
(b)Baking powder is a mixture of baking soda and tartaric acid whereas baking soda is only
sodium hydrogencarbonate.
(c)When baking powder mixes with water, then sodium hydrogencarbonate reacts with tartaric
acid to evolve carbon dioxide gas which gets trapped in the wet dough and bubbles out slowly
making the cake soft and spongy.

Question 42:
(a) What is the chemical name of bleaching powder ?



(b) What is the chemical formula of bleaching powder ?
(c) What are the materials used for the preparation of bleaching powder ?
(d) State one use of bleaching powder (other than bleaching).
Solution :
(a) Calcium oxychloride.
(b) CaOCl2
(c) Calcium hydroxide and chlorine.
(d) It is used for disinfecting drinking water supply.

Question 43:
What does a soda-acid type fire extinguisher contain ? How does it work ? Explain the working
of a soda- acid fire extinguisher with the help of a labelled diagram.
Solution :
Working:
A soda-acid type fire extinguisher contains a solution of sodium hydrogencarbonate and
sulphuric acid in separate containers in separate containers inside them. When the knob of the
fire extinguisher is pressed, then sulphuric acid mixes with sodium hydrogencarbonate
solution to produce carbon dioxide gas which forms a blanket around the burning substance
and cuts off the supply of air to burning substance; this stops the process of burning and fire
gets extinguished.

Question 44:
(a) Name a sodium compound used for softening hard water.
(b) Which compound of calcium is used for disinfecting drinking water supply ?
(c) Name a metal compound which has detergent properties (cleansing properties).
(d) Name one compound of calcium which is used for removing the colour of a coloured cloth.
(e) State a peculiar (or remarkable) property of plaster of Paris.
(f) Name the substance obtained by the action of chlorine on solid (dry) slaked lime.
Solution :
(a) Sodium
carbonate.
(b) Bleaching
powder.
(c) Sodium carbonate.
(d) Bleaching
powder.
(e) It sets into a
hard mass on mixing with proper quantity of water.
(f) Bleaching
powder.

Question 45:
(a) What is gypsum ? What happens when gypsum is heated to 100°C (373 K) ?
(b) Name a sodium compound which is used for making borax and glass.



(c) Name the compound which is used in hospitals for setting fractured bones.
(d) Which is the real bleaching agent present in bleaching powder ?
Solution :
(a) Gypsum is calcium sulphate dihydrate, CaSO4.2H2O. When gypsum is heated to a
temperature of 100?C, it loses 3/4th of its water of crystallisation and forms plaster of Paris.
(b) Sodium carbonate.
(c) Plaster of Paris.
(d) Chlorine.

Question 46:
(a) What is “baking powder”? How does it make the cake soft and spongy ?
(b) In addition to sodium hydrogencarbonate, baking powders contain a substance X. Name
the substance X. What is the role of substance X in the baking powder ?
Solution :
(a) Baking powder is a mixture of baking soda and tartaric acid. When baking powder mixes
with water, then sodium hydrogencarbonate reacts with tartaric acid to evolve carbon dioxide
gas which gets trapped in the wet dough and bubbles out slowly making the cake soft and
spongy.
(b) Substance X is tartaric acid. It can react with any sodium carbonate formed and neutralise
it otherwise cakes and bread will taste bitter.

Question 47:
State two uses each of the following compounds :
(a) Sodium hydroxide
(b) Chlorine
(c) Hydrogen
(d) Hydrochloric acid
Solution :
(a) Sodium hydroxide:
(i) It is used for making soaps and detergents.
(ii) It is used in the manufacture of paper.
(b) Chlorine:
(i) It is used in the production of bleaching powder.
(ii) It is used in the production of hydrochloric acid.
(c) Hydrogen:
(i) It is used in the production of hydrochloric acid.
(ii) It is used in the hydrogenation of oils.
(d) Hydrochloric acid:
(i) It is used in medicines and cosmetics.
(ii) It is used in textile/dyeing and tanning industries.

Question 48:
(a) What is the common name of the compound CaOCl2 ?
(b) Name the raw material used for the preparation of plaster of Paris.
(c) Which property of plaster of Paris is utilised in making casts for broken limbs in hospitals ?
(d) Explain why chlorine is used for sterilising drinking water supply.
Solution :
(a) Bleaching powder.
(b) Gypsum.
(c) It sets into a hard mass in about 30 mins.
(d) Chlorine is used for sterilising drinking water supply because it is a disinfectant which kills
germs or bacteria.



Question 49:
(a) What happens when a concentrated solution of sodium chloride (brine) is electrolysed ?
Write the equation
of the reaction involved.
(b) Why is the electrolysis of a concentrated solution of sodium chloride known as chlor-alkali
process ?
(c) Name three products of the chlor-alkali process. State two uses of each of these products.
Solution :
(a) When a concentrated solution of sodium chloride is electrolysed, it decomposes to form
sodium hydroxide, chlorine and hydrogen.

(b) Because of the products formed: Chlor for chlorine and alkali for sodium hydroxide.
(c) Sodium hydroxide, chlorine and hydrogen.
Uses of Sodium hydroxide:
(i) It is used for making soaps and detergents.
(ii) It is used in the manufacture of paper.
Uses of chlorine:
(i) It is used in the production of bleaching powder.
(ii) It is used in the production of hydrochloric acid.
Uses of hydrogen:
(i) It is used in the production of hydrochloric acid.
(ii) It is used in the hydrogenation of oils.

Question 50:
(a) Describe how washing soda is produced starting from sodium chloride (common salt).
Write equations
of all the reactions involved.
(b) State whether an aqueous solution of washing soda is acidic or alkaline ? Give reason for
your answer.
(c) What is meant by saying that washing soda has detergent properties ?
(d) Give two important uses of washing soda (or sodium carbonate).
Solution :
(a) Production of washing soda: Washing soda is produced from sodium chloride (or common
salt) in the following three steps:
(i) A cold and concentrated solution of sodium chloride (called brine) is reacted with ammonia
and carbon dioxide to obtain sodium hydrogen carbonate :

Sodium hydrogen carbonate formed is only slightly soluble in water, so it precipitates out as a
solid.
(ii) Sodium hydrogen carbonate is separated by filtration, dried and heated. On heating, sodium
hydrogen carbonate decomposes to form sodium carbonate:

The anhydrous sodium carbonate obtained here is called soda ash.
(iii) Anhydrous sodium carbonate (soda ash) is dissolved in water and recrystallised to get
washing soda crystals containing 10 molecules of water of crystallisation :



(b) An aqueous solution of washing soda is alkaline because it turns red litmus to blue.
(c) Washing soda has detergent properties because it can remove dirt and grease from dirty
clothes.
(d) (i) It is used as cleansing agent for domestic purposes.
(ii) It is used for removing permanent hardness of water.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:99

Question 51:
(a) What is bleaching powder ? How is bleaching powder prepared ? Write chemical equation
of the reaction
involved in the preparation of bleaching powder.
(b) What happens when bleaching powder reacts with dilute sulphuric acid ? Give equation of
the reaction involved.
(c) State two important uses of bleaching powder.
Solution :
(a) Bleaching powder is Calcium oxychloride (CaOCl2). It is prepared by passing chlorine gas
over dry slaked lime.

(c) (i) It is used for disinfecting drinking water supply.
(ii) It is used in the manufacture of chloroform.

Question 52:
(a) What is plaster of Paris ? Write the chemical formula of plaster of Paris.
(b) How is plaster of Paris prepared ? Write chemical equation of the reaction involved.
(c) Explain why plaster of Paris should be stored in a moisture-proof container.
(d) State two important uses of plaster of Paris.
Solution :
(a) Plaster of paris is calcium sulphate hemihydrate. Its chemical formula is: CaSO4.1/2H2O.
(b) It is prepared by heating gypsum to a temperature of 100oC in a kiln; it loses 3/4th of its
water of crystallisation and forms plaster of paris.

(c) This is because the presence of moisture can cause the slow setting of plaster of Paris by
bringing about its hydration.
(d) Uses of plaster of Paris:
(i) It is used as a fire proofing material.
(ii) it is used in hospitals for setting fractured bones in the right position to ensure correct
healing.

Question 53:
(a) What is a salt ? Give the names and formulae of any two salts. Also name the acids and
bases from which these salts may be obtained.
(b) What is meant by ‘a family of salts’ ? Explain with examples.
(c) What is meant by ‘hydrated’ and ‘anhydrous’ salts ? Explain with examples.
(d) Write the names, formulae and colours of any two hydrated salts.



(e) What will be the colour of litmus in an aqueous solution of ammonium chloride salt ?
Solution :
(a) A salt is a compound formed from an acid by the replacement of the hydrogen in the acid
by a metal.
Example: Sodium chloride – NaCl; It is obtained from hydrochloric acid and sodium metal.
Ammonium chloride – NH4Cl; It is obtained from ammonia and hydrochloric acid.
(b) The salts having the same positive ions are said to belong to a family of salts.
Example: Sodium chloride and sodium sulphate belong to the same family of salts called
sodium salts.
(c) The salts which contain water of crystallisation are called hydrated salts.
Example: Copper sulphate crystals contain 5 molecules of water of crystallisation.
The salts which have lost their water of crystallisation are called anhydrous salts.
Example: On strong heating, copper sulphate crystals lose all the water of crystallisation and
form anhydrous copper sulphate.
(d) Copper sulphate pentahydrate salt – Its chemical formula is CuSO4.5H2O. It is blue in
colour.
Iron sulphate heptahydrate salt – Its chemical formula is FeSO4.7H2O. It is green in colour.
(e) The aqueous solution of ammonium chloride salt turns blue litmus red.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:100

Question 69:
P and Q are aqueous solutions of sodium chloride and sodium hydroxide, respectively. Which
of these will turn :
(a) blue litmus red ?
(b) red litmus blue ?
Solution :
(a) No solution will turn blue litmus to red.
(b) Solution Q (sodium hydroxide) will turn red litmus blue.

Question 70:
The metal salt A is blue in colour. When salt A is heated strongly over a burner, then a
substance B is eliminated and a white powder C is left behind. When a few drops of a liquid D
are added to powder C, it becomes blue again. What could be A, B, C and D ?
Solution :
A is copper sulphate pentahydrate, CuSO4.5H2O
B is water, H2O
C is anhydrous copper sulphate, CuSO4
D is water, H2O

Question 71:
When the concentrated aqueous solution of substance X is electrolysed, then NaOH, Cl2 and
H2 are produced. Name the substance X. What is the special name of this process ?
Solution :
X is Sodium chloride. The process is called Chlor-alkali process.

Question 72:
Consider the following substances :
NaCl, Ca(OH)2, NaHCO3, NH3, Na2CO3, H2O, Cl2, CO2, CaSO4.2H2O, 2CaSO4.H2O, CaOCl2
(a) Which two substances combine to form bleaching powder ?
(b) Which four substances are utilised in the production of washing soda ?
(c) Which compound represents plaster of Paris ?



(d) Which compound is a part of baking powder ?
(e) Which compound is used as an antacid ?
Solution :
(a) Ca(OH)2 and Cl2
(b) NaCl, NH3, H2O and CO2
(c) 2CaSO4.H2O
(d) NaHCO3
(e) NaHCO3

Question 73:
Give one example each of a salt which gives an aqueous solution having :
(a) pH less than 7
(b) pH equal to 7
(c) pH more than 7
Solution :
(a) Ammonium chloride, NH4Cl
(b) Sodium chloride, NaCl
(c) Sodium carbonate, Na2CO3

Question 74:
A compound X which is prepared from gypsum has the property of hardening when mixed
with a proper quantity of water.
(a) Identify the compound X ,
(b) Write the chemical equation for its preparation
(c) For what purpose is it used in hospitals ?
Solution :
(a) Plaster of Paris.

(c) POP is used in hospitals for setting fractured bones in the right position to ensure correct
healing.

Question 75:
Consider the following salts :
Na2CO3, NaCl, NH4Cl, CH3COONa, K2SO4, (NH4)2SO4 Which of these salts will give :
(a) acidic solutions ?
(b) neutral solutions ?
(c) basic solutions (or alkaline solutions) ?
Solution :

Question 76:
A white powdery substance having strong smell of chlorine is used for disinfecting drinking
water supply at waterworks. Identify the substance. Give its chemical name and write the
chemical reaction for its preparation.
Solution :
Bleaching powder, CaOCl2.



Question 77:
A salt X when dissolved in distilled water gives a clear solution which turns red litmus blue.
Explain the phenomenon.
Solution :
Salt
X is like sodium carbonate, Na2CO3, which is made from
a strong base and a weak acid. On dissolving in water, salt X gets hydrolysed
to form some strong base and some weak acid. The strong base thus formed
makes the solution alkaline which turns red litmus blue.

Question 78:
A person found that the cake prepared by him is hard and small in size. Which ingredient has
he forgotten to add that would have caused the cake to rise and become light ? Explain your
answer.
Solution :
Baking
powder; When baking powder mixes with water, then sodium hydrogen carbonate
reacts with tartaric acid to evolve carbon dioxide gas which gets trapped in
the wet dough and bubbles out slowly making the cake soft and spongy.

Question 79:
A white chemical compound becomes hard on mixing with proper quantity of water. It is also
used in surgery to maintain joints in a fixed position. Name the chemical compound.
Solution :
Plaster of Paris.

Question 80:
When chlorine and sodium hydroxide being produced during the electrolysis of brine are
allowed to mix, a new chemical is formed. Name this chemical and write its uses.
Solution :
Sodium hypochlorite, NaClO; used in making household bleaches and for bleaching fabrics.

Question 81:
Write the name and formula of one salt each which contains :
(a) two molecules of water of crystallisation
(b) five molecules of water of crystallisation
(c) ten molecules of water of crystallisation
Solution :
(a) Gypsum – CaSO4.2H2O
(b) Copper sulphate crystals – CuSO4.5H2O
(c) Sodium carbonate crystals – Na2CO3.10H2O

Question 82:
How many molecules of water of crystallisation (per formula unit) are present in :
(a) copper sulphate crystals ?
(b) washing soda ?
(c) gypsum ?
Solution :
(a) 5.
(b) 10.
(c) 2.
You can watch video lessons on YouTube:



Control and Coordination

Question 1:
What is the general name of chemical substances which bring about control and coordination
in plants ?
Solution :
Phytohormones.

Question 2:
Which plant hormone is responsible for the wilting and falling of leaves ?
Solution :
Abscisic acid is responsible for the wilting and falling of leaves in plants.

Question 3:
Which plant hormone makes a stem (or shoot) bend towards light ?
Solution :
Auxin.

Question 4:
Where is the auxin hormone made in a plant stem ?
Solution :
Auxin is made at the tip of the plant stem.

Question 5:
What is the scientific name of sensitive plant ?
Solution :
Mimosa pudica.

Question 6:
Name one plant hormone that promotes growth and another plant hormone which inhibits
growth.
Solution :

A plant hormone that promotes growth is Gibberellin and the hormone that inhibits growth is
abscisic acid.

Question 7:
Name one example of the movement of a plant part which is very quick and can be observed
easily.
Solution :
Thigmonastic movement in the leaves of touch-me-not plant is very quick and can be observed
easily.



Question 8:
Name the type of chemical substances that control the growth in plants.
Solution :
Phytohormones.

Question 9:
What is the stimulus in : (a) phototropism ? (b) geotropism ? (c) chemotropism ? (d)
hydrotropism ? (e) thigmotropism ?
Solution :
(a) Light.
(b) Gravity.
(c) Chemical.
(d) Water.
(e) Touch.

Question 10:
Give the scientific terms used to represent the following :
(a) Bending of a shoot towards light.
(b) Growing of roots towards the earth.
(c) Growth of a pollen tube towards ovule.
(d) Bending of roots towards water.
(e) Winding of tendril around a support
Solution :
(a) Phototropism.
(b) Geotropism.
(c) Chemotropism.
(d) Hydrotropism.
(e) Thigmotropism.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:93

Question 11:
Give one example of the movement of a plant part which is caused by the loss of water (or
migration of water).
Solution :
Thigmonasty.

Question 12:
Give one example each of a plant part:
(a) which is positively hydrotropic as well as positively geotropic.
(b) which is positively phototropic but negatively geotropic.
Solution :



(a) Root.
(b) Stem.

Question 13:
Which of the following is a growth movement and which is not ?
(a) folding up of leaves of sensitive plant on touching with hand.
(b) folding up of petals of dandelion flower when light fades.
Solution :
(a) is not growth movement whereas
(b) is growth movement.

Question 14:
Name the plant part :
(a) which bends in the direction of gravity but away from light
(b) which bends towards light but away from the force of gravity
Solution :
(a) Root.
(b) Stem.

Question 15:
To which directional stimuli do :
(a) roots respond ?
(b) shoots respond ?
Solution :
(a) Gravity.
(b) Light.

Question 16:
Fill in the following blanks :
(a) A plant’s response to light is called…………..
(b) A plant’s response to gravity is called…………..
(c) Plant shoot grows upward in response to…………….
(d) Plant roots grow downward in response to…………..
(e) Tendrils wind around a support in response to……………
(f) Plant roots grow towards…….. and in the direction of force of……………
(g) A root of a plant grows downward. This is known as…………..
(h) ……….is the hormone that causes phototropism in plants
(i) The response of leaves to the sunlight is called……………
Solution :
(a) Phototropism.
(b) Geotropism.
(c) Light.
(d) Gravity.
(e) Touch.
(f) Earth, gravity.
(g) Geotropism.
(h) Auxin.
(i) Photonasty.

Question 17:
Plant parts show two types of movements, one dependent on growth and the other
independent of growth. Give one example of the movement in plant parts :



which depends on growth
which does not depend on growth
Solution :
(a) Bending of stem towards light.
(b) Folding up of leaves of a sensitive plant on touching.

Question 18:
What is a plant hormone ? Name four plant hormones. State one function of each.
Solution :
The hormones that control and coordinate the activities in plants are called plant hormones.
The four types of plant hormones are:
(i) Auxins – It promotes cell enlargement and cell differentiation in plants.
(ii) Gibberellines – It helps in breaking the dormancy in seeds and buds.
(iii) Cytokinins – It promotes cell division in plants.
(iv) Abscisic acid – It promotes the dormancy in seeds and buds.

Question 19:
(a) What does a root do in response to gravity ? What is this phenomenon known as ?
(b) What does a stem (or shoot) do in response to light ? What is this phenomenon known as ?
Solution :
(a) Root bends downwards in the direction of gravity; positive geotropism. (b) Stem bends
towards the light; positive phototropism.

Question 20:
(a) What does a stem (or shoot) do in response to gravity ? What is this phenomenon known
as ?
(b) What does a root do in response to light ? What is this phenomenon known as ?
Solution :
(a) Stem grows upward against the direction of gravity; negative geotropism.(b) Root bends
away from light; negative phototropism

Question 21:
(a) What does a Mimosa pudica plant do in response to touch ? What is this phenomenon
known as ?
(b) What happens to the dandelion flower (z) during daytime, and (ii) at night ? What is this
phenomenon known as ?
Solution :
(a) In Mimosa pudica plant, the leaves fold up in response to touch. This phenomenon is
known as thigmonasty.
(b)
(i) A dandelion flower opens up in the morning in bright light. This phenomenon is known is
positive photonasty.
(ii) At night, the dandelion flower closes and this phenomenon is known as negative
photonasty.

Question 22:
(a) What does a plant root do in response to water ? What is this phenomenon known as ?
(b) What happens to the moonflower (i) during daytime, and (ii) at night ? What is this
phenomenon known as ?
Solution :
(a) The plant root grows towards water and the phenomenon is known as the hydrotropism.
(b)



(i) During the daytime the petals of moon flower close when there is bright light.
(ii) At night, when it is dark the petals of moon flower opens up. This phenomenon is known as
photonasty.

Question 23:
What is a tendril ? Name the two types of tendrils. What does a tendril do in response to the
touch of a support ? What is this phenomenon known as ?
Solution :
Tendrils are the thin, thread-like growths on the stems or leaves of climbing plants. The two
types of tendrils are stem tendrils and leaf tendrils. The tendrils grow towards the things they
happen to touch. This phenomenon is known as thigmotropism.

Question 24:
Name the five types of tropisms. How are tropic movements helpful to plants ? Explain with an
example.
Solution :
The five types of tropisms are: Phototropism, Geotropism, Chemotropism, Hydrotropism and
Thigmotropism. The various types of tropic movements help the plants to survive. Example
even if a seed is planted upside down, its root will grow downwards into earth because it is
positively geotropic.

Question 25:
Define chemotropism. Give one example of chemotropism. State whether this example is of
positive chemotropism or negative chemotropism.
Solution :
The growth of a plant part due to chemical stimulus is known as chemotropism. For example
the growth of pollen tube towards the ovule induced by a sugary substance as stimulus. This
is an example of positive chemotropism.

Question 26:
Distinguish between tropic movements and nastic movements in plants. Give examples to
illustrate your answer.
Solution :
Tropic movements
1. These movements are always in the direction of the stimulus.
2. These movements are slow.
3. These movements are exhibited by all parts of a plant. For example, movement of shoot
towards the light and not towards gravity.
Nastic movements
1. These movements are neither away nor towards the stimulus.
2. These movements are fast.
3. These movements are exhibited by the flat organs (like leaves and petals of flowers) of a
plant. For example, the bending and drooping of leaves in ‘Touch-me-not’ plant.

Question 27:
(a) What is meant by nastic movements in plants ? Give one example of nastic movements in
plants.
(b) What is the difference between photonasty and thigmonasty ?
Solution :
(a) The movement of a plant part in response to an external stimulus in which the direction of
response is not determined by the direction of stimulus is called nastic movement. Example:
The folding up of the leaves of a sensitive plant on touching is an example of thigmonasty.



(b)

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:94

Question 28:

(a) Which figure shows the correct position taken by the parts A and B of the plant ?
(b) What type of phenomenon is exhibited by the figure chosen in (a) above ?
Solution :
(a) Figure
(ii)
(b) Geotropism.

Question 29:
Name the plant hormones which are responsible for the following effects :
(a) falling of leaves
(b) opening of stomata
(c) bending of stem towards light (d) closing of stomata
Solution :
(a) Abscisic Acid
(b) Cytokinin
(c) Auxin
(d) Abscisic Acid

Question 30:
Name the plant organs which are :
(a) positively phototropic (b) positively geotropic
(c) negatively geotropic (d) positively hydrotropic
Solution :
(a) Stem
(b) Root
(c) Stem
(d) Root

Question 31:
Why is the folding up of the leaves of a sensitive plant on touching with a finger not a tropism ?
Solution :
The folding of leaves of a sensitive plant is not a case of tropism (like thigmotropism) because
in this case the direction of movement of leaves does not depend on the direction of stimulus
(touch).



Question 32:
Why is the closing of a dandelion flower at dusk (when it gets dark) not a tropism ?
Solution :
The closing of a dandelion flower at dusk (when it gets dark) is not a tropism because the
direction of movement of petals of dandelion flower does not depend on the direction of
stimulus (light).

Question 33:
(a) What is meant by ‘tropisms’ (or tropic movements) ? Explain with an example.
(b) What are the different types of tropisms ? Define each type of tropism. Write the name of
stimulus in each case.
(c) How do tropisms differ from nasties (or nastic movements) ?
Solution :
(a) A growth movement ofa plant part in response to an external stimulus in which the
direction of stimulus determines the direction of response is called tropism. Example – The
bending of plant stem towards light is an example of positive phototropism.
(b) Different types of tropisms are:
(i) Phototropism – The movement of a plant part in response to light is called phototropism.
Its stimulus is light.
(ii) Geotropism – The movement of a plant part in response to gravity is called geotropism. Its
stimulus is gravity.
(iii) Chemotropism – The movement of a plant part in response to a chemical stimulus is
called chemotropism. Its stimulus is chemical.
(iv) Hydrotropism – The movement of a plant part in response to a water stimulus is called
hydrotropism. Its stimulus is water.
(v) Thigmotropism – The movement of a plant part in response to a touch stimulus is called
thigmotropism. Its stimulus is touch.
(c)
Tropisms:
1. These movements are always in the direction of the stimulus.
2. These movements are slow.
3. These movements are exhibited by all parts of a plant.
For example, movement of shoot towards the light and not towards
Nasties:
1. These movements are neither away nor towards the stimulus.
2. These movements are fast.
3. These movements are exhibited by the flat organs (like leaves and petals of flowers) of a
plant.
For example, the bending and dropping of leaves in ‘Touch-me-not’ plant.

Question 34:
(a) Define phototropism. Give one example of phototropism.
(b) How does phototropism occur in a plant stem (or shoot) ? Explain with the help of labelled
diagrams.
(c) What is meant by positive phototropism and negative phototropism ? Give one example of
each type.
Solution :
(a) Phototropism – The movement of a plant part in response to light is called phototropism.
Example -Stem bends towards the light is positive phototropism.
(b) Phototropism in a plant stem – The bending of a plant stem towards light is an example of
phototropism. The plant stem responds to light and bends towards it due to the action of
auxin hormone. The auxin hormone is present at the tip of the stem of the growing plant. Auxin



prefers to stay in shade away from light so when sunlight falls on the stem from one side, it
gets concentrated on the opposite side. Due to more auxin, the shady side of the stem grows
to be longer than the side of stem which is facing light, and makes the stem bend towards
light.

(c) The movement of a plant part towards light is called positive phototropism. Example ? the
stem of the growing bends towards light. The movement of a plant part away from light is
called negative phototropism. Example ? The roots of a plant move away from light.

Question 35:
(a) Define geotropism. Give one example of geotropism.
(b) What is meant by ‘positive geotropism’ and ‘negative geotropism ? Give one example of
each type. Draw a labelled diagram to illustrate your answer indicating the plant part which
shows positive geotropism and the plant part which shows negative geotropism.
(c) Name one plant part which exhibits positive thigmotropism.
Solution :
(a) The movement of plant part in response to gravity is called geotropism. Example – Roots
grow towards gravity.
(b) If the plant part moves towards the direction of gravity, it is called positive geotropism.
Example – Roots. If the plant part moves against the direction of the gravity it is negative
geotropism. Example – Stem

(c) Tendrils.

Question 36:
(a) How does control and coordination take place in plants ? How does it differ from that in
animals ?
(b) Name five stimuli which act on plants. Name the type of tropism produced by each one of
these stimuli.
(c) Define hydrotropism. Give one example of hydrotropism. State whether this example is of
positive hydrotropism or negative hydrotropism. Illustrate your answer with the help of labelled
diagram.
Solution :
(a) The plants do not have a nervous system but they can sense things in the presence of
stimuli such as light, touch, water etc. and respond to them by the action of hormones. Thus,
the plants coordinate their behavior against environmental behavior by using organic
chemicals called hormones. This is called chemical coordination. The hormones in plants
coordinate their behavior by affecting the growth of a part of the plant resulting in the
movement of that plant part in response to a stimulus. The control and coordination in



animals takes place by both nervous system and hormones.
(b)
(i) Light – Phototropism.
(ii) Gravity – Geotropism.
(iii) Chemical – Chemotropism.
(iv) Water – Hydrotropism.
(v) Touch – Thigmotropism.
(c) The movement of a plant part in response to water is called hydrotropism. Example: The
roots of a plant always go towards water, this is positive hydrotropism.

Question 37:
(a) What is meant by positive tropism and negative tropism ? Explain with examples.
(b) Define thigmotropism. Give one example of thigmotropism.
(c) What is the difference between thigmotropism and thigmonasty ? Name one plant which
exhibits thigmotropism and one plant which exhibits thigmonasty. What behaviour (or
responses) of these plants make you think that they exhibit thigmotropism and thigmonasty
respectively ?
Solution :
(a) The growth of a plant part in response to a stimulus is called positive tropism and if the
growth of a plant part is away from the stimulus, then it is called negative tropism.Example:
The roots of a plant go towards earth in response to gravity is an example of positive
geotropism whereas stem grows away from earth against gravity is an example of negative
geotropism.
(b) The directional growth movement of a plant part in response to the touch of an object is
called thigmotropism.Example: Tendrils grow towards any support which they happen to
touch and wind around it.
(c)

Tendrils grow towards a stimulus hence it is a directional movement which shows that it is a
case of thigmotropism whereas, the folding of leaves in mimosa plant does not depend on the
direction of stimulus (touch) which shows that it is an example of thigmonasty.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:115

Question 1:
Name the two systems of control and coordination in higher animals.
Solution :
Nervous system and Endocrine system.

Question 2:
What are the two parts of the vertebrate nervous system ?



Solution :
Central nervous system and Peripheral nervous system.

Question 3:
If we happen to touch a hot object unknowingly, we immediately pull back our hand. What is
this type of action known as ?
Solution :
Reflex action.

Question 4:
Name the three components of a neuron (or nerve cell).
Solution :
Cell body, dendrites and axon.

Question 5:
(a) What are the short fibres of a neuron known as ?
What is the long fibre of a neuron known as ?
Solution :
(a) Dendrites.
(b) Axon.

Question 6:
Name the most important part of the human brain.
Solution :
Cerebrum.

Question 7:
Which part of the brain maintains posture and balance of the body ?
Solution :
Cerebellum.

Question 8:
State one function each of cerebellum and pons.
Solution :
Function:
(a) Cerebellum ? It helps in maintaining posture and balance of the body.
(b) Pons ? It regulates the respiration process.

Question 9:
Name one hormone secreted by the pituitary gland.
Solution :
Growth hormone.

Question 10:
Where are hormones made in the human body ?
Solution :
Endocrine glands.

Question 11:
What is the name of the system of glands which produces hormones ?
Solution :
Endocrine system.



Question 12:
Which gland secretes the growth hormone ?
Solution :
Pituitary gland.

Question 13:
Name the hormones secreted by (a) testes, and (b) ovaries
Solution :
(a) Testosterone.
(b) Progesterone and oestrogen.

Question 14:
What are the scientific names for the following receptors in animals ?
(a) receptors for light
(b) receptors for heat
(c) receptors for sound
(e) receptors for smell
(e) receptors for taste
Solution :
(a) Photoreceptors.
(b) Thermoreceptors.
(c) Phonoreceptors.
(d) Olfactory receptors.
(e) Gustatory receptors.

Question 15:
Name the disease caused by the deficiency of insulin hormone in the body.
Solution :
Diabetes.

Question 16:
Name, the disease caused by the deficiency of thyroxine hormone in the body.
Solution :
Goitre.

Question 17:
Which halogen element is necessary for the making of thyroxine hormone by the thyroid gland
?
Solution :
Iodine.

Question 18:
Why are some patients of diabetes treated by giving injections of insulin ?
Solution :
The people having severe diabetes are treated by giving injections of insulin.

Question 19:
What is the name of in-built ‘arrangement’ in our body which controls the timing and amount
of hormones released by various endocrine glands in the body ?
Solution :
Feedback mechanism.



Question 20:
Name one gland each :
(a) which acts only as an endocrine gland.
(b) which acts only as an exocrine gland.
(c) which acts both as an endocrine gland as well as an gxocrine gland.
Solution :
(a) Thyroid gland.
(b) Salivary glands.
(c) Pancreas.

Question 21:
What part does the diet play in helping us to have a healthy thyroid gland ?
Solution :
Diet provides iodine for making thyroxine hormone which keeps the thyroid gland healthy.

Question 22:
If sugar is detected in the urine of a person, name the disease he is suffering from.
Solution :
Diabetes.

Question 23:
Name two parts of the body which contain receptors of chemical stimuli.
Solution :
Nose and Tongue.

Question 24:
Which part of the eye contains cells which are sensitive to light ?
Solution :
Retina.

Question 25:
What are the two main communications systems in an animal’s body ?
Solution :
Nervous system and endocrine system.

Question 26:
Which one term in each of the following includes the other three ?
(a) thyroid, ductless gland, thymus, pituitary, ovary
(b) adrenalin, insulin, hormone, thyroxine, estrogen
Solution :
(a) Ductless gland.
(b) Hormone.

Question 27:
Which parts of the body form the central nervous system ?
Solution :
Brain and spinal cord.

Question 28:
Give three examples of reflex actions.
Solution :
(i) Knee jerk reflex.



(ii) Sneezing.
(iii) Coughing.

Question 29:
Why do you need iodine in your diet ?
Solution :
Because iodine is necessary for making thyroxine hormone.

Question 30:
State whether coughing is a voluntary action or reflex action.
Solution :
Reflex action.

Question 31:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The two examples of effectors are…………. and………………
(b) Our…………. system allows Us to react to our surroundings. Information from receptors
passes
along…………. neurons to our brain. Our brain sends impulses along………… neurons to our
muscles.
(c) A neuron which carries an impulse to the brain is called a……………….
(d) The neuron which carries a message for action to a muscle or gland is known as
a……………….
Solution :
(a) Muscle; glands.
(b) Nervous; sensory; motor.
(c) Sensory.
(d) Motor.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:116

Question 32:
(a) What are the various sense organs in our body ?
(b) What is meant by receptors and effectors ? Give two examples of each.
Solution :
(a) There are 5 sense organs: Eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin.
(b) A receptor is a cell (or a group of cells) in a sense organ which is sensitive to a particular
type of stimulus (or a particular type of change in the environment).
Example: Photoreceptors and Phonoreceptors.An effecter is the part of the body which can
respond to the stimulus according to the instructions sent from the nervous system (spinal
cord and brain).
Example: Muscles and glands.

Question 33:
(a) What is spinal cord ? What is its main function ?
(b) Give the functions of medulla.
Solution :
(a) Spinal cord is a cylindrical structure which begins in continuation with medulla and extends
downwards. Its function is the conduction of nerve impulses to and from the brain and it is
concerned with spinal reflex actions.
(b) The medulla controls various involuntary actions such as heart beat, breathing, blood
pressure and peristaltic movements of the elementary canal.



It is also the controlling centre for reflexes such a swallowing, coughing, sneezing, secretion of
saliva and vomiting.

Question 34:
(a) Name the three types of nerves which constitute the peripheral nervous system.
(b) What is the difference between a reflex action and walking ?
(c) How do we detect the smell of an incense stick (agarbatti) ?
Solution :
(a) The three types of nerves which make up the peripheral nervous system are: spinal nerves,
cranial nerves and visceral nerves.
(b)

(c) When the agarbatti burns, it produces vapours having a characteristic pleasant smell which
is detected by the olfactory receptors present inside our nose. The action of smell of agarbatti
or receptors sets off chemical reactions which generate electrical impulses. The sensory
neurons carry these electric al impulses to the sensory area of fore brain called cerebrum. This
makes us detect the smell of burning agarbatti.

Question 35:
(a) What substances are made by endocrine glands ?
(b) What is the function of receptors and effectors in our body ?
Solution :
(a) Hormones are made by endocrine glands.
(b) Receptors are the special cells present in our sense organs which detect all the information
from our environment and feed it to the nervous system. An effector responds to electrical
impulses sent from the nervous system through motor nerves.

Question 36:
(a) Name the hormones secreted by the following endocrine glands :
(i) Thyroid gland (ii) Parathyroid glands (iii) Pancreas (iv) Adrenal glands
(b) Write the functions of testosterone and oestrogen hormones.
Solution :
(a)
(i) Thyroxine
(ii) Parathromone
(iii) Insulin
(iv) Adrenaline.
(b) The function of testosterone hormone is to control the development of male sex organs
and male features such as deeper voice, moustache, body hairs etc. The function of oestrogen
is to control the development of female sex organs and female features such as feminine
voice, soft skin and mammary glands.

Question 37:
(a) Write the names of the regions in hindbrain. Give one function of each region.
(b) Name the functions of cerebrum.



Solution :
(a) Hindbrain has 3 regions:
(i) Pons: It takes part in regulating respiration.
(ii) Cerebellum: It helps in maintaining posture and balance of the body. It enables us to make
precise and accurate movements.
(iii) Medulla: The medulla controls various involuntary actions such as heart beat, breathing,
blood pressure and peristaltic movements of the elementary canal. It is also the controlling
centre for reflexes such a swallowing, coughing, sneezing, secretion of saliva and vomiting.
(b) Function of cerebrum: It is the main thinking part of the brain. It is the site of our faculties
such as learning, reasoning, intelligence, personality and memory. All our thoughts, sensation,
actions and movements are controlled by cerebrum.

Question 38:
(a) The human brain can be broadly divided into three regions. Name these three regions.
(b) What is cranium ? What is its function ?
Solution :
(a) The 3 regions of human brain are
(i) Forebrain
(ii) Midbrain and
(iii) Hindbrain.
(b) Cranium is a bony box in the skull in which the brain is present. Its function is to protect the
brain.

Question 39:
(a) How does chemical coordination take place in human beings ?
(b) Why is the use of iodised salt advisable ?
Solution :
(a) The chemical coordination in animals takes place through the actions of chemicals called
hormones which are release directly into the blood and are carried by the blood circulatory
system to other parts of the body. Hormones travel all over the body but affect only particular
organs at particular places which are called target organs. The organs control and coordinate
several functions of animal body such as growth, development, metabolism, behavior and
secondary sexual characteristics, etc.
(b) Iodine is necessary for the thyroid gland to make thyroxine hormone which regulates the
metabolism of carbohydrates, fats and proteins so as to produce the best balance for the
growth. Iodised salt is advisable as it contains appropriate amounts of iodine compounds
needed by the thyroid gland to make sufficient thyroxine hormone for the body and hence
goitre disease can be prevented.

Question 40:
What is the function of insulin hormone ? What type of patients are given insulin injections ?
Solution :
The function of insulin hormone is to lower the blood sugar level (or blood glucose level).
People having severe diabetes are treated by giving injections of insulin.

Question 41:
Compare the nervous system and endocrine system (hormonal system) for control and
coordination in humans.
Solution :
Nervous System
It is a system to coordinate the activities of bodies. It helps all other system of our body to
work together. It receives information from the surroundings, processes it, interprets it and



then responds accordingly.
Endocrine System
It is a group of endocrine glands which produces various hormones that helps in coordinating
the activities of our body. The hormones produced by the endocrine glands act as messengers
between the nervous system and the organs of our body.

Question 42:
State the functions of the following hormones :
(a) Thyroxine (b) Adrenaline (c) Growth hormone
Solution :
(a) Thyroxine ? The function of this hormone is to control the rate of metabolism of
carbohydrates, fats and proteins in the body.
(b) Adrenaline ? Its function is to regulate heart rate, breathing rate, blood pressure and
carbohydrate metabolism.
(c) Growth hormone ? It controls the growth of the human body.

Question 43:
Write the names of all the major endocrine glands present in the human body. Which of these
glands also function as exocrine glands ?
Solution :
The endocrine gland present in the human body are:
(i) Pineal gland
(ii) Hypothalamus
(iii) Pituitary
(iv) Thyroid
(v) Parathyroid
(vi) Thymus
(vii) Pancreas
(viii) Adrenal glands
(ix) Testes (in males)
(x) Ovaries (in females). Pancreas, testes and ovaries function as exocrine glands.

Question 44:
Match the hormones given in column I with their functions given in column II :

Solution :
(i) d
(ii) c
(iii) e
(iv) a
(v) b

Question 45:
A person walks across a room in barefeet and puts his foot on a drawing pin lying on the floor.
He lets out a cry. Explain what happens in his nervous system in bringing about this response.
Solution :
It is an example of reflex action. The stimulus here is drawing pin lying on the floor. The pain is



sensed by the receptors in the skin which triggers and impulse in a sensory neuron and
transmits the message to the spinal cord. The impulse is passed onto a relay neuron, which in
turn, passes it to the motor neuron. The motor neuron passes the impulse to a muscle in the
feet. The muscle then contracts and pulls our feet away from the drawing pin.

Question 46:
In what ways are puberty and adolescence result of the activity of some glands in the human
body ?
Solution :
Puberty and adolescence are the results of sex glands in human beings. In males, testes make
male sex hormones called testosterone which is associated with male puberty, which the boys
attain an age of 13-14 years. In females the oestrogen hormone is responsible for all the
changes associated with female puberty which the girl attains at an age of 10-12 years.

Question 47:
List three ways in which neurons are similar to other cells.
Solution :
Neurons and other cells have a cell membrane, cytoplasm and a nucleus.

Question 48:
Explain the difference between each of the following pairs of terms :
(a) receptor and effector (b) cerebrum and cerebellum
Solution :
(a)
Receptor
A receptor is a cell (or a group of cells) in a sense organ which is sensitive to a particular type
of stimulus (or a particular type of change in the environment).
Example: Photoreceptors and Phonoreceptors.
Effector
An effector is the part of the body which can respond to the stimulus according to the
instructions sent from the nervous system (spinal cord and brain).
Example: Muscles and glands.
(b)
Cerebrum
(i) It is a part of forebrain.
(ii) It is the main thinking part of the brain. All our thoughts, sensation, actions and movements
are controlled by cerebrum.
Cerebellum
(i) It is a part of hindbrain.
(ii) It helps in maintaining posture and balance of the body. It enables us to make precise and
accurate movements.

Question 49:
What is the difference between a voluntary and an involuntary action ? Which kind of action is
digestion ? Explain your choice.
Solution :



Digestion is an involuntary action as it does not involve the thinking process and is performed
unknowingly by our digestive system.

Question 50:
What does CNS stand for ? Which part of CNS : (a) consists of two cerebral hemispheres, and
(b) has spinal nerves attached to it ?
Solution :
(i) CNS – Central nervous system.
(ii)
(a) Cerebrum
(b) Spinal cord.

Question 51:
Which hormone :
(a) prepares the body for action ?
(b) controls the amount of glucose in blood ?
(c) gives boys a deep voice ?
(d) gives girls soft skin ?
Solution :
(a) Adrenaline.
(b) Insulin.
(c) Testosterone.
(d) Oestrogen.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:117

Question 52:
When you smell a favourite food your mouth begins to water (that is, you secrete saliva). Write
down what the following are examples of :
(a) the smell of the food
(b) the cells in your nasal passages which perceive the smell
(c) the gland which is stimulated to secrete saliva.
Solution :
(a) Stimulus.
(b) Receptors (Olfactory).
(c) Effector (Salivary glands).

Question 53:
(a) Name the structural and functional unit of nervous system.
(b) Draw a flow chart to show the classification of nervous system into various parts.
(c) What is autonomic nervous system ? What is its function ?
(d) What is voluntary nervous system ? Explain the working of voluntary nervous system with
an example.
Solution :
(a) Te structural and functional unit of nervous system is neuron.
(b)

(c) Autonomic nervous system means self governing nervous system. Its function is to control



and regulate the functions of the internal organs of our body involuntarily.
(d) The voluntary nervous system is a system which helps us to take voluntary actions which
are under the conscious control of the brain. Example: If a student is getting late for school
and sees his watch. He starts walking fast. In this process, the eyes see the time and send the
information to the brain through the sensory nerves. The brain analyses the information and
sends the instructions to walk faster to the muscle of our legs through the motor nerves. The
muscles of the legs act accordingly and make the student walk faster.

Question54:
(a) What is a reflex action ? Explain with the help of an example.
(b) Define reflex arc. Give the flow chart of a spinal reflex arc.
(c) How are involuntary actions and reflex actions different from each other ?
Solution :
(a) The rapid, automatic response to a stimulus which is not under the voluntary action of the
brain is called reflex action.Example: Moving our hand away on touching a hot plate.

Question 55:
(a) What is the function of our nervous system ?
(b) What are the main organs of the human nervous system ? Draw a labelled diagram to show
the main organs of the human nervous system.
(c) How does the human nervous system work ? Explain.
Solution :
(a) (i) The function of the nervous system is to coordinate the activities of our body. (ii) It helps
all other systems of our body to work together. (iii) It receives information from the
surroundings, processes it, interprets it and then responds accordingly. (b) The main organs of
the nervous system are; brain, spinal cord and nerves.



(c) When the sense organ in our body is affected, it sends the message to the brain in the form
of electrical impulses through the sensory neurons. The brain analyses this message and
decides the action to be taken. The brain then sends out instructions to the muscles of the
concerned body parts through motor nerves and the concerned body part acts accordingly.

Question 56:
(a) What is a neuron ? Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron.
(b) What is a synapse ? What happens at the synapse between two neurons ? How are the
messages carried across a synapse ? Explain with the help of a labelled diagram.
Solution :
(a) The unit which makes up the nervous system is called a neuron.

(b) A microscopic gap between a pair of adjacent neurons over which nerve impulses pass
when going from one neuron to the next is called a synapse. Synapse between two neurons
acts as a one way valve which allows electrical impulses to pass in one direction only. This
happens as follows: When an electrical impulse coming from the receptor reaches the end of
the axon of sensory neuron, then the electrical impulse releases tiny amount of a chemical
substance called neuro transmitter substance into the synapse between two adjacent
neurons. This substance crosses the synapse and starts a similar electrical impulse in the
dendrite of the next neuron. In this way, the electrical impulses passes from one neuron to the
next across the synapse.



Question 57:
(a) Name two systems which taken together perform the functions of control and coordination
in human beings.
(b) What does the central nervous system in humans consist of ? What is the job of the central
nervous system ?
(c) Give the various functions of brain.
Solution :
(a) Nervous system and endocrine system.
(b) The central nervous system consists of the brain and spinal cord. The work of the CNS is to
direct incoming messages to the motor neurons that are connected to the part of the body
which will respond to a stimulus. It is involved in complicated responses where both (brain and
spinal cord) work. It enables a person to give a more appropriate and more intelligent response
to various situations.
(c)
(i) The brain receives information carrying nerve impulses from all the sensory organs of the
body.
(ii) It responds to the impulses brought in by sensory organs by sending its own instructions
through motor nerves to the muscles and glands causing them to function accordingly.
(iii) It correlates the various stimuli from different sense organs and produces the most
appropriate and intelligent response.
(iv) It coordinates the body activities so that the mechanisms and chemical reactions of the
body work together efficiently.
(v) It stores information so that behavior can be modified according to the past experience.

Question 58:
(a) Write the names of five endocrine glands found in the human body. Name the hormones
secreted by each gland.
(b) How do hormones reach the organs they control ?
(c) Name the gland which controls the secretion of hormones from the pituitary.
(d) How does our body respond when adrenaline is secreted in large amounts into the blood ?
(e) Name the disease which occurs in adults due to the deficiency of iodine in the diet. What is
the main symptom of this disease ?
Solution :
(a)
(i) Pituitary – Growth.
(ii) Thyroid – Thyroxine.
(iii) Pancreas – Insulin.
(iv) Adrenal – Adrenaline.
(v) Testes – Testosterone.



(b) The endocrine glands do not have ducts to secrete their hormones. They release hormones
directly into the blood of a person and reach the concerned body part through the blood and
act on it.
(c) Hypothalamus.
(d) The adrenaline hormone prepares our body to function at maximum efficiency during
emergency situations like danger, anger etc. This adrenaline hormone increases our heartbeat,
breathing rate, blood flow into muscles and causes liver to put more stored glucose into our
blood. All these actions produce a lot of energy in our body and help us to cope up the
emergency situations. Thus, when adrenaline is secreted in large amounts it prepares our
body for action. (e) Goitre – The neck of the person appears to be swollen due to the
enlargement of thyroid gland located in the neck.



 Magnetic Effects of ElectricCurrent

Question 1:
State any two properties of magnetic field lines.
Solution :
Prop of magnetic field lines:
(i) The magnetic field lines originate from the north pole of a magnet and end at its south pole.
(ii) The strength of magnetic field is indicated by the degree of closeness of the field lines.
Where the field lines are closest together, the magnetic field is the strongest there.

Question 2:
What are the two ways in which you can trace the magnetic field pattern of a bar magnet ?
Solution :
(i) By using iron filings
(ii) By using compass

Question 3:
You are given the magnetic field pattern of a magnet. How will you find out from it where the
magnetic field is the strongest ?
Solution :
Magnetic field is the strongest at the place where the magnetic field lines are closest together.

Question 4:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
The axis of earth’s imaginary magnet and the geographical axis coincide with each other.
Solution :
False
The axis of earth’s imaginary magnet is inclined at an angle of 15o with the geographical axis.

Question 5:
Why does a compass needle get deflected when brought near a bar magnet ?

Solution :
A compass needle gets deflected when brought near a bar magnet because the bar magnet
exerts a magnetic force on the compass needle, which is itself a tiny pivoted magnet.



Question 6:
Where do the manufacturers use a magnetic strip in the refrigerator ? Why is this magnetic
strip used ?
Solution :
Manufacturers use a magnetic strip in the refrigerator’s door to keep it closed properly.

Question 7:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Magnetic field lines leave the………….. pole of a bar magnet and enter at its……………
(b) The earth’s magnetic field is rather like that of a………….. magnet with its……….. pole in the
northern hemisphere.
Solution :
(a) north; south.
(b) bar; south.

Question 8:
Draw a diagram to show the magnetic field lines around a bar magnet.
Solution :

Magnetic field lines around a bar magnet.

Question 9:
What is a magnetic field ? How can the direction of magnetic field lines at a place be
determined ?
Solution :
The space surrounding a magnet in which magnetic force is exerted, is called a magnetic field.
The direction of magnetic field lines at a place can be determined by using a compass needle.
A compass needle placed near a magnet gets deflected due to the magnetic force exerted by
the magnet. The north end of the needle of the compass indicates the direction of magnetic
field at the point where it is placed.

Question 10:
Explain why, two magnetic field lines do not intersect each other.
Solution :
Two magnetic field lines do not intersect each other due to the fact that the resultant force on
a north pole at any point can be only in one direction. But if the two magnetic lines get
intersect one another, this means that resultant force on a north pole placed at the point of
interection will be along two directions, which is not possible.

Question 11:



When an electric current is passed through any wire, a magnetic field is produced around it.
Then why an electric iron connecting cable does not attract nearby iron objects when electric
current is switched on through it ?
Solution :
Because the strength of magnetic field produced by the cable is quite weak.

Question 12:
(a) Define magnetic field lines. Describe an activity to draw a magnetic field line outside a bar
magnet from one pole to another pole.
(b) Explain why, a freely suspended magnet always points in the north-south direction.
Solution :
(a) The magnetic field lines are the lines drawn in a magnetic field along which a north
magnetic pole would move. The magnetic field lines are also known as magnetic lines of
forces.
Activity to draw a magnetic field line outside a bar magnet from one pole to another pole:
Take a small compass and a bar magnet.
Place the magnet on a sheet of white paper fixed on a drawing board, using some adhesive
material.
Mark the boundary of the magnet.
Place the compass near the north pole of the magnet. The south pole of the needle points
towards the north pole of the magnet. The north pole of the compass is directed away from
the north pole of the magnet.
Mark the position of two ends of the needle.
Now move the needle to a new position such that its south pole occupies the position
previously occupied by its north pole.
In this way, proceed step by step till you reach the south pole of the magnet .
Join the points marked on the paper by a smooth curve. This curve represents a magnetic field
line.
(b) A freely suspended magnet points in the north-south direction because earth behaves as a
magnet with its south pole in the geographical north and the north pole in the geographical
south.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:74

Question 24:
Copy the figure given below which shows a plotting compass and a magnet. Label the N pole
of the magnet and draw the field line on which the compass lies.

Solution :
As the north pole of the magnetic needle is pointing in the opposite direction,so the nearer end
of the magnet will be north pole.



Question 25:
(a) The diagram shows a bar magnet surrounded by four plotting compasses. Copy the
diagram and mark in it the direction of the compass needle for each of the cases B, C and D.

(b) Which is the north pole, X or Y ?
Solution :
(a)

(b) X, as it repels the north pole (tip) of magnetic needle.

Question 26:
The three diagrams in the following figure show the lines of force (field lines) between the
poles of two magnets. Identify the poles A, B, C, D, E and F.

Solution :
A=N; B=N; C=S; D=S; E=N; F=S

Question 27:
The figure given below shows the magnetic field between two magnets :



(i) Copy the diagram and label the other poles of the magnets.
(ii) Which is the weaker magnet ?
Solution :
(a)

(ii) Magnet 2 is weaker.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:81

Question 1:
Which effect of current can be utilised in detecting a current ​carrying wire concealed in a wall ?
Solution :
Magnetic effect.

Question 2:
What conclusion do you get from the observation that a current-carrying wire deflects a
compass needle placed near it ?
Solution :
We conclude that a current carrying wire produces a magnetic field around it.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:82

Question 3:
Name the scientist who discovered the magnetic effect of current.
Solution :
Magnetic effect of current was discovered by Oersted.

Question 4:
State qualitatively the effect of inserting an iron core into a current-carrying solenoid.
Solution :
Magnetic field becomes very strong.

Question 5:
Name the rule for finding the direction of magnetic field produced by a straight current-
carrying conducloj.



Solution :
Maxwell’s right hand thumb rule.

Question 6:
State the form, of magnetic field lines around a straight current-carrying conductor.
Solution :
The magnetic field lines around a straight current-carrying conductor are concentric circles
whose centres lie on the conductor.

Question 7:
What is the other name of Maxwell’s right-hand thumb rule ?
Solution :
Maxwell’s corkscrew rule.

Question 8:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
The magnetic field inside a long circular coil carrying current will be parallel straight lines.
Solution :
True.

Question 9:
What is the shape of a current-carrying conductor whose magnetic field pattern resembles
that of a bar magnet ?
Solution :
Solenoid.

Question 10:
State three ways in which the strength of an electromagnet can be increased.
Solution :
The strength of an electromagnet can be increased by
(i) increasing the number of turns in the coil
(ii) increasing the current flowing in the coil
(iii) reducing the length of air gap between the poles

Question 11:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The lines of……………. round a straight current-carrying conductor are in the shape
of…………………………
(b) For a current-carrying solenoid, the magnetic field is like that of a………………………….
(c) The magnetic effect of a coil can be increased by increasing the number of………………………. ,
increasing the…………….. , or inserting an…………….. core.
(d) If a coil is viewed from one end and the current flows in an anticlockwise direction, then
this end is a pole.
(e) If a coil is viewed from one end, and the current flows in a clockwise direction, then this end
is a…………………..
Solution :
(a) magnetic field; concentric circles
(b) bar magnet
(c) turns; current; iron
(d) north
(e) south.



Question 12:
Describe how you will locate a current-carrying wire concealed in a wall.
Solution :
A current-carrying wire concealed in a wall can be located due to the magnetic effect of
current by using a plotting compass. If a plotting compass is moved on a wall, its needle will
show deflection at the place where current-carrying wire is concealed.

Question 13:
Describe some experiment to show that the magnetic field is associated with an electric
current.
Solution :

We take a thick insulated copper wire and fix it in such a way that the portion AB of the wire is
in the north-south direction as shown in fig. A plotting compass M is placed under the wire AB.
The two ends of the wire are connected to a battery through a switch. When no current is
flowing in the wire AB, the compass needle is parallel to the wire AB and points in the usual
north-south direction. When current is passed through wire AB by closing the switch, we find
that the compass needle is deflected from its north-south position. On opening the switch, the
compass needle returns to its original position.
Thus, the deflection of compass needle by the current carrying wire shows that magnetic field
is associated with an electric current.

Question 14:
(a) Draw a sketch to show the magnetic lines of force due to a current-carrying straight
conductoi
(b) Name and state the rule to determine the direction of magnetic field around a straight
current-oar- ing conductor.
Solution :
(a)

(b) Maxwells right-hand thumb rule: According to this rule, imagine that you are grasping the
current-carrying wire in your right hand so that your thumb points in the direction of current,



then the direction in which your fingers encircle the wire will give the direction of magnetic
field lines around the wire.

Question 15:
State and explain Maxwell’s right-hand thumb rule.
Solution :
(b) According to Maxwell’s right hand thumb rule: Imagine that you are grasping the current-
carrying wire in your right hand so that your thumb points in the direction of current, then the
direction in which your fingers encircle the wire will give the direction of magnetic field lines
around the wire.

Let AB be the straight wire carrying current in the vertically upward direction from A to B. To
find out the direction of the magnetic field lines produced by this current, we imagine that we
are grasping the current carrying wire in our right hand as shown in fig. so that our thumb
points in the direction of current towards B. Now, the direction in which our fingers are folded
gives the direction of magnetic field lines. In this case, the direction of magnetic field lines is in
the anticlockwise direction.

Question 16:
What is Maxwell’s corkscrew rule ? For what purpose is it used ?
Solution :
According to Maxwell’s corkscrew rule: Imagine driving a corkscrew in the direction of current,
then the direction in which we turn its handle is the direction of magnetic field.
This rule is used to determine the direction of magnetic field around a straight current carrying
conductor.

Question 17:
(a) Draw the magnetic lines of force due to a circular wire carrying current.
(b) What are the various ways in which the strength of magnetic field produced by a current-
carrying circular coil can be increased ?
Solution :
(a)



(b) The strength of magnetic field produced by a current-carrying circular coil can be increased
by:
-increasing the number of turns of wire in the coil.
-increasing the current flowing through the coil.

Question 18:
State and explain the Clock face rule for determining the polarities of a circular wire carrying
current.
Solution :
According to the Clock face rule, we look at one face of a circular wire (or coil) through which a
current is passing:
(i) If the current around the face of the circular wire (or coil) flows in the clockwise direction,
then that face of the circular wire will be South pole (S-pole).
(ii) If the current around the face of the circular wire (or coil) flows in the anti-clockwise
direction, then that face of the circular wire will be North pole (N-pole).

Question 19:
Name any two factors on which the strength of magnetic field produced by a current-carrying
solenoid depends. How does it depend on these factors ?
Solution :
The strength of magnetic field produced by a current-carrying solenoid depends on:
1. The strength of current in the solenoid: Larger the current passed through solenoid, stronger
will be the magnetic field produced.
2. The number of turns in the solenoid: Larger the number of turns in the solenoid, greater will
be the magnetic field produced.

Question 20:
(a) Draw a circuit diagram to show how a soft iron piece can be transformed into an



electromagnet.
(b) Describe how an electromagnet could be used to separate copper from iron in a scrap
yard.
Solution :
(a)

A coil C of insulated copper wire is wound around a soft iron core NS and the two ends of the
copper coil are connected to a battery. Thus, an electromagnet using a soft iron core.
(b) Electromagnetic cranes are used to separate copper from iron in a scrap yard. The current
is switched on to energise the electromagnet and pick up the iron pieces from the scrap. Then
these iron pieces are moved to another position, the electromagnet in switched off and the
iron pieces are released.

Question 21:
(a) How does an electromagnet differ from a permanent magnet ?
(b) Name two devices in which electromagnets are used and two devices where permanent
magnets are used.
Solution :
(a) An electromagnet produces a magnetic field so long as current flows in its coil i.e., it
produces temporary magnetic field.; but a permanent magnet produces a permanent
magnetic field.
(b) Electromagnets: Electric bell, electric motors
Permanent magnets: Refrigerator doors, toys

Question 22:
(a) What is a solenoid ? Draw a sketch to show the magnetic field pattern produced by a
current-carrying
solenoid.
(b) Name the type of magnet with which the magnetic field pattern of a current-carrying
solenoid resembles.
(c) What is the shape of field lines inside a current-carrying solenoid ? What does the pattern of
field lines inside a current-carrying solenoid indicate ?
(d) List three ways in which the magnetic field strength of a current-carrying solenoid can be
increased ?
(e) What type of core should be put inside a current-carrying solenoid to make an
electromagnet ?
Solution :
(a) A solenoid is a long coil containing a large number of close turns of insulated copper wire.



(b) The magnetic field produced by a current-carrying solenoid is similar to the magnetic field
produced by a bar magnet.
(c) Magnetic field lines inside a current-carrying solenoid are in the form of parallel straight
lines. This indicates that the magnetic field inside the solenoid is uniform.
(d) The magnetic field strength of a current-carrying solenoid can be increased by
(i) increasing the number of turns in the solenoid.
(ii) increasing the current flowing through the solenoid.
(iii) using soft iron as core in the solenoid.
(e) Soft iron core.

Question 23:
(a) What is an electromagnet ? Describe the construction and working of an electromagnet
with the help of
a labelled diagram.
(b) Explain why, an electromagnet is called a temporary magnet.
(c) Explain why, the core of an electromagnet should be of soft iron and not of steel.
(d) State the factors on which the strength of an electromagnet depends. How does it depend
on these factors ?
(e) Write some of the important uses of electromagnets.
Solution :
(a) An electromagnet is a temporary magnet that works on the magnetic effect of current. It
consists of a long coil of insulated copper wire wrapped around a soft iron core that is
magnetised ony when electric current is passed through the coil.
To make an electromagnet, we take a rod NS of soft iron and wind a coil C of insulated copper
wire around it. When the two ends of the copper coil are connected to a battery, an
electromagnet is formed.

(b) An electromagnet is called a temporary magnet because it produces magnetic field so
long as current flows in its coil.
(c) Core of an electromagnet should be of soft iron and not of steel because soft iron loses all
its magnetism when current in the coil is switched off but steel does not lose its magnetism
when the current is stopped.
(d) Strength of electromagnet depends on:



i. The number of turns in the coil – Increasing the number of turns in the coil increases the
strength of the electromagnet.
ii. The current flowing in the coil – Increasing the current flowing in the coil increases the
strength of the electromagnet.
iii. The length of air gap between its poles: Reducing the length of air gap between the poles of
electromagnet increases the strength of the electromagnet.
(e) Electromagnets are used in several electrical devices such as electric bell, electric motor,
loudspeaker etc. They are also used by doctors to remove particles of iron or steel from a
patient’s eye and to remove pieces of iron from wounds.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:84

Question 37:
In the straight wire A, current is flowing in the vertically downward direction whereas in wire B
the current is flowing in the vertically upward direction. What is the direction of magnetic field :
(a) in wire A ?
(b) in wire B ?
Name the rule which you have used to get the answer.
Solution :

Question 38:
The figure shows a solenoid wound on a core of soft iron. Will the end A be a N pole or S pole
when the current flows in the direction shown ?

Solution :
End A will be a S-pole because current flows in the clockwise direction at A.

Question 39:
A current-carrying straight wire is held in exactly vertical position. If the current passes through



this wire in the vertically upward direction, what is the direction of magnetic field produced by
it ? Name the rule used to find out the direction of magnetic field.
Solution :
Direction of magnetic field is anticlockwise.

Maxwell’s right hand thumb rule. is used to find out the direction of magnetic field.

Question 40:
For the coil in the diagram below, when the switch is pressed :
(a) what is the polarity of end A ?
(b) which way will the compass point then ?

Solution :
(a) End A becomes S-pole because current flows in clockwise direction at A.
(b) When A becomes S-pole, the other end becomes N-pole. So the tip of the compass (with
also has North polarity) moves away from this end i.e., tip moves towards right.

Question 41:
A current flows downwards in a wire that passes vertically through a table top. Will the
magnetic field lines around it go clockwise or anticlockwise when viewed from above the table
?
Solution :
Magnetic field lines around it will be clockwise (according to Maxwell’s right hand thumb rule).

Question 42:
The directions of current flowing in the coil of an electromagnet at its two ends X and Y are as
shown below:

(a) What is the polarity of end X ?
(b) What is the polarity of end Y ?
(c) Name and state the rule which you have used to determine the polarities.
Solution :
(a) End X is S-pole (because current flows in clockwise direction).
(b) End Y is N-pole (because current flows in anticlockwise direction).
(c) Clock face rule – Looking at the face of a loop, if the current around that face is in
anticlockwise direction, the face has north polarity, while if the current at that face is in
clockwise direction, the face has south polarity.



Question 43:
The magnetic field associated with a current-carrying straight conductor is in anticlockwise
direction. If the conductor was held along the east-west direction, what will be the direction of
current through it ? Name and state the rule applied to determine the direction of current ?
Solution :
The direction of current will be from east to west.
We have applied MAxwell’s right hand thumb rule here.
According to Maxwell’s right hand thumb rule: Imagine that you are grasping the current-
carrying wire in your right hand so that your thumb points in the direction of current, then the
direction in which your fingers encircle the wire will give the direction of magnetic field lines
around the wire.

Question 44:
A current-carrying conductor is held in exactly vertical direction. In order to produce a
clockwise magnetic field around the conductor, the current should be passed in the conductor
:
(a) from top towards bottom
(b) from left towards right
(c) from bottom towards top
(d) from right towards left
Solution :
(a) from top towards bottom.

Question 45:
A thick wire is hanging from a wooden table. An anticlockwise magnetic field is to be
produced around the wire by passing current through this wire by using a battery. Which
terminal of the battery should be connected to the :
(a) top end of wire ?
(b) bottom end of wire ?
(c) Give reason for your choice.
Solution :
(a) Negative terminal
(b) Positive terminal
Because the current should be passed into wire upwards.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:85

Question 1:
What produces magnetism in the human body ?
Solution :
Weak ionic currents flowing in the human body produce magnetism.

Question 2:
Name one medical technique which is based on magnetism produced in human body. For
what purpose is this technique used ?
Solution :
The technique called Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is based on magnetism produced in
human body. It is used for obtaining images of internal parts of the body.

Question 3:
Name two human body organs where magnetism produced is significant.
Solution :



Brain and heart.

Question 4:
What is the full form of MRI ?
Solution :
Magnetic Resonance Imaging.

Question 5:
Name the technique by which doctors can produce pictures showing insides of the human
body.
Solution :
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)

Question 6:
Name one technique which can detect cancerous tissue inside the body of a person.
Solution :
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI).

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:91

Question 1:
What happens when a current-carrying conductor is placed in a magnetic field ?
Solution :
When a current-carrying conductor is placed in a magnetic field, a mechanical force is exerted
on the conductor which can make the conductor move.

Question 2:
When is the force experienced by a current-carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field
largest ?
Solution :
The force experienced by a current-carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field is the largest
when the current carrying conductor is at right angles to the magnetic field.

Question 3:
In a statement of Fleming’s left-hand rule, what do the following represent ?
(a) direction of centre finger.
(b) direction of forefinger.
(c) direction of thumb.
Solution :
(a) Current.
(b) Magnetic field.
(c) Force acting on the conductor.

Question 4:
Name one device which works on the magnetic effect of current.
Solution :
Electric bell works on the magnetic effect of current. It uses an electromagnet to produce
sound.

Question 5:
Name the device which converts electrical energy into mechanical energy.
Solution :



Electrical motor.

Question 6:
A motor converts one form of energy into another. Name the two forms.
Solution :
Electrical energy to mechanical energy.

Question 7:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
An electric motor converts mechanical energy into electrical energy.
Solution :
False
An electric motor converts electrical energy into mechanical energy.

Question 8:
For Fleming’s left-hand rule, write down the three things that are 90° to each other, and next to
each one write down the finger or thumb that represents it.
Solution :
(a) Current – direction of center finger.
(b) Magnetic field – direction of fore finger.
(c) Force or Motion – direction of thumb.

Question 9:
Name the device which is used to reverse the direction of current in the coil of a motor.
Solution :
A commutator reverses the direction of current in the coil of a motor.

Question 10:
What is the other name of the split ring used in an electric motor ?
Solution :
Commutator.

Question 11:
What is the function of a commutator in an electric motor ?
Solution :
The function of commutator rings is to reverse the direction of current flowing through the coil
every time the coil just passes the vertical position during a revolution.

Question 12:
Of what substance are the brushes of an electric motor made ?
Solution :
Carbon.

Question 13:
Of what substance is the core of the coil of an electric motor made ?
Solution :
The core of the coil of an electric motor made of soft iron.

Question 14:
In an electric motor, which of the following remains fixed and which rotates with the coil ?
Commutator ; Brush
Solution :



Brush remains fixed. Commutator rotates with the coil.

Question 15:
What is the role of the split ring in an electric motor ?
Solution :
The function of split rings is to reverse the direction of current flowing through the coil every
time the coil just passes the vertical position during a revolution.

Question 16:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Fleming’s Rule for the motor effect uses the…………………..
(b) A motor contains a kind of switch called a……………………. which reverses the current every
half…………………..
Solution :
(a) left
(b) Commutator; rotation.

Question 17:
(a) A current-carrying conductor is placed perpendicularly in a magnetic field. Name the rule
which can be
used to find the direction of force acting on the conductor.
(b) State two ways to increase the force on a current-carrying conductor in a magnetic field.
(c) Name one device whose working depends on the force exerted on a current-carrying coil
placed in a magnetic field.
Solution :
(a) Fleming’s left hand rule.
(b) By increasing the current flowing in the conductor; by increasing the strength of magnetic
field.
(c) Electric motor.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:92

Question 18:
State Fleming’s left-hand rule. Explain it with the help of labelled diagrams.
Solution :
Fleming’s left hand rule: Hold the forefinger, the centre finger and the thumb of your left hand
to right angles to one other. Adjust your hand in such a way that the forefinger points in the
direction of magnetic field and the and the centre finger points in the direction of current, than
the direction in which thumb points, gives the direction of force acting on the conductor.

Question 19:
What is the principle of an electric motor ? Name some of the devices in which electric motors
are used.
Solution :



Fleming’s left hand rule: Hold the forefinger, the centre finger and the thumb of your left hand
to right angles to one other. Adjust your hand in such a way that the forefinger points in the
direction of magnetic field and the and the centre finger points in the direction of current, than
the direction in which thumb points, gives the direction of force acting on the conductor.

Question 20:
(a) In a d.c. motor, why must the current to the coil be reversed twice during each rotation ?
(b) What device reverses the current ?
Solution :
(a) The current to the coil must be reversed twice during each rotation so that the coil keeps
rotating continuously in the same direction.
(b) Commutator.

Question 21:
(a) State what would happen to the direction of rotation of a motor if :
(i) the current were reversed
(ii) the magnetic field were reversed
(iii) both current and magnetic field were reversed simultaneously.
(b) In what ways can a motor be made more powerful ?
Solution :
(a)
(i) Direction of rotation would be reversed
(ii) Direction of rotation would be reversed
(iii) Direction of the rotation would remain unchanged
(b) Motor can be made more powerful by winding the coil on a soft iron core of by increasing
the number of turns of the coil.

Question 22:
(a) What is an electric motor ? With the help of a labelled diagram, describe the working of a
simple electric motor.
(b) What are the special features of commercial electric motors ?
Solution :
(a) Electric motor is a device used for converting electrical energy into mechanical energy.
Working of an electric motor:



Initially, the coil ABCD is in the horizontal position. On pressing the switch, current enters the
coil through carbon brush P and commutator half ring X. The current flows in the direction
ABCD and leaves via ring Y and brush Q. The direction of magnetic field is from N pole to S
pole of the magnet. According to Fleming’s left-hand rule, the force on sides AB and CD is in
the downward and upward directions respectively. This makes the coil ABCD move in the
anticlockwise direction.
When the coil reaches vertical position, then the brushes P and Q will touch the gap between
the two commutator rings and current is cut off. But the coil does not stop rotating as it has
already gained momentum. When the coil goes beyond the vertical position, the side CD
comes on the left side and side AB comes to the right side, and the two commutator rings
change contact from one brush to the other. This reverses the direction of current in the coil,
which in turn reverses the direction of forces acting on the sides AB and CD of the coil. The
side CD is pushed down and side AB is pushed up. Thus, the coil rotates anticlockwise by
another half rotation.
The reversing of current in the coil is repeated after every half rotation due to which the coil
(and its shaft) continues to rotate as long as current from the battery is passed through it. The
rotating shaft of electric motor can drive a large number of machines which are connected to
it.
(b) In commercial electric motors:
i. the coil is wound on a soft iron core. This increases the strength of magnetic field, which
makes the motor more powerful.
ii. the coil contains a large number of turns of insulated copper wire.
iii. a powerful electromagnet is used in place of permanent magnet.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:93

Question 31:
In the simple electric motor of figure given below, the coil rotates anticlockwise as seen by the
eye from the position X when current flows in the coil.

Is the current flowing clockwise or anticlockwise around the coil when viewed from above ?
Solution :
Clockwise direction (according to Fleming’s left hand rule).



Question 32:
Which way does the wire in the diagram below tend to move ?

Solution :
According to Fleming’s left hand rule, the wire moves in the upward direction (out of the page).

Question 33:
If the current in a wire is flowing in the vertically downward direction and a magnetic field is
applied from west to east, what is the direction of force on the wire ?
Solution :
Force will be due South (according to Fleming’s left hand rule).

Question 34:
Which way does the wire in the diagram below tend to move ?

Solution :
According to Fleming’s left hand rule, the wire moves in the downward direction (into the
page).

Question 35:
What is the force on a current-carrying wire that is parallel to a magnetic field ? Give reason for
your answer.
Solution :
Force on a current-carrying wire that is parallel to magnetic field will be zero.
This is because the magnitude of force depends on the sin of the angle between the direction
of current and the direction of magnetic field, so if the current carrying wire is held parallel to
the magnetic field, the force will be zero.

Question 36:
A charged particle enters at right angles into a uniform magnetic field as shown :

What should be the nature of charge on the particle if it begins to move in a direction pointing
vertically out of the page due to its interaction with the magnetic field ?
Solution :
Positive charge.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:102

Question 1:
Name the device which converts mechanical energy into electric energy.



Solution :
Electric Generator.

Question 2:
Out of an A.C. generator and a D.C. generator :
(a) which one uses a commutator (split rings) ?
(b) which one uses slip rings ?
Solution :
(a) D.C. Generator.
(b) A.C. Generator.

Question 3:
Name the phenomenon which is made use of in an electric generator.
Solution :
Electromagnetic Induction.

Question 4:
Name the rule which gives the direction of induced current.
Solution :
Fleming’s Right Hand Rule.

Question 5:
What condition is necessary for the production of current by electromagnetic induction ?
Solution :
The condition necessary for the production of current by electromagnetic induction is that
there must be a relative motion between the wire and the magnet.

Question 6:
What type of generator is used at Power Stations ?
Solution :
AC Generator (or Alternator).

Question 7:
What change should be made in an a.c. generator so that it may become a d.c. generator ?
Solution :
If we replace the slip rings of an AC generator by a commutator, then it will become a DC
generator.

Question 8:
State whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) A generator works on the principle of electromagnetic induction.
(b) A motor works on the principle of electromagnetic induction.
Solution :
(a) True
(b) False

Question 9:
What is the function of brushes in an electric generator ?
Solution :
Function of brushes is to transfer the current from coil to load.

Question 10:



When a wire is moved up and down in a magnetic field, a current is induced in the wire. What
is this phenomenon known as ?
Solution :
This phenomena is known as electromagnetic induction.

Question 11:
When current is ‘switched on’ and ‘switched off’ in a coil, a current is induced in another coil
kept near it. What is this phenomenon known as ?
Solution :
Electromagnetic induction

Question 12:
What is the major difference between the simple alternator and most practical alternators ?
Solution :
Simple alternator:- Magnet fixed and coil rotates;
Practical alternator:- Coil fixed and magnet rotates.

Question 13:
Why are Thermal Power Stations usually located near a river ?
Solution :
To obtain water for making steam for turning turbines and for cooling spent steam to
condense it back into hot water for making fresh steam.

Question 14:
List three sources of magnetic fields.
Solution :
Electromagnet, permanent magnet, wire carrying current.

Question 15:
Complete the following sentence :
A generator with commutator produces………………… current.
Solution :
direct.

Question 16:
Two circular coils A and B are placed close to each other. If the current in coil A is changed,
will some current be induced in the coil B ? Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
Yes, some current will be induced in the coil B because of change in magnetic field through the
coil B due to change in current in coil A. This is called electromagnetic induction.

Question 17:
(a) Explain the principle of an electric generator.
(b) State two ways in which the current induced in the coil of a generator could be increased.
Solution :
(a) Electric generator is based on the principle that when a straight conductor is moved in a
magnetic field, then current is induced in the conductor.
(b) Two ways in which the current induced in the coil of a generator could be increased are:
(i) by roating the coil faster.
(ii) by using a coil with a larger area.

Question 18:



(a) What is the difference between alternating current and direct current ?
(b) What type of current is given by (i) a dry cell, and (ii) a Power House generator ?
Solution :
(a) The difference between AC and DC is that DC flows in one direction only while AC reverses
direction after equal intervals of time.
(i) DC current remains same with time in its value and direction.
(ii) AC current changes with time and changes its direction every time after a certain interval of
time.
(b)
(i) DC
(ii) AC

Question 19:
State and explain Fleming’s right hand rule.
Solution :
The direction of induced current produced in a straight conductor moving in a magnetic field is
given by Fleming’s right hand rule.
According to Fleming’s right hand rule : Hold the thumb, the fore finger and the centre finger of
your right-hand at right angles to one another. Adjust your hand in such a way that forefinger
points in the direction of magnetic field, and thumb points in the direction of motion of
conductor, then the direction in which centre finger points, gives the direction of induced
current in the conductor.

Question 20:
Name and state the rule to find the direction of :
current induced in a coil due to its rotation in a magnetic field.
force experienced by a current-carrying straight conductor placed in a magnetic field which is
perpendicular to it.
Solution :
(a) Fleming’s right hand rule:- Hold the thumb, the fore finger and the centre finger of your
right-hand at right angles to one another. Adjust your hand in such a way that forefinger points
in the direction of magnetic field, and thumb points in the direction of motion of conductor,
then the direction in which centre finger points, gives the direction of induced current in the
conductor.

(b) Fleming’s left hand rule:- Hold the forefinger, the centre finger and the thumb of your left
hand at right angle to one another. Adjust your hand in such a way that the forefinger points in
the direction of magnetic field and the and centre finger points in the direction of current, then
the direction in which thumb points, gives the direction of force acting on the conductor.



Question 21:
(a) In what respect does the construction of an A.C. generator differ from that of a D.C.
generator ?
(b) What normally drives the alternators in a Thermal Power Station ? What fuels can be used
to heat water in the boiler ?
Solution :
(a). Construction-wise, the only difference between a D.C. generator and an A.C. generator is in
the way the two ends of the generator coil are linked to the outer circuit. In a D.C. generator we
connect the two ends of the coil to a commutator consisting of two half rings of copper. In an
A.C. generator we connect the two ends of the coil to two full rings of copper called slip rings.
There is no commutator in an A.C. generator.
(b) Generally, the alternators in a Thermal Power Station are driven by the power of high
pressure steam.
To heat water in the boiler, fuels like coal or natural gas can be used.

Question 22:
Draw the labelled diagram of an A.C. generator. With the help of this diagram, explain the
construction and working of an A.C. generator.
Solution :

Question 23:
(a) What do you understand by the term “electromagnetic induction”? Explain with the help of a
diagram.
(b) Name one device which works on the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction.
(c) Describe different ways to induce current in a coil of wire.
Solution :
(a) The production of electricity from magnetism is known as electromagnetic induction.
Let us move a wire AB upward rapidly between the poles of the horseshoe magnet. When the
wire is moved up, there is a deflection in the galvanometer pointer which shows a current is
produced in the wire AB momentarily. Thus, as the wire is moved up through the magnetic
field, an electric current is produced in it.



(b) Electric generator.
(c) Different ways to induce current in a coil of wire are:
(i) by moving the coil relative to a fixed magnet
(ii) by keeping the coil fixed and moving a magnet relative to it.

Question 24:
(a) What do you understand by the terms ‘direct current’ and ‘alternating current’ ?
(b) Name some sources of direct current and some of alternating current.
(c) State an important advantage of alternating current over direct current.
(d) What is the frequency of A.C. supply in India ?

Solution :
(a) If the current flows in one direction only, it is known as direct current; and if the current
reverses direction after equal intervals of time, it is called alternating current.
(b) Source of DC are dry cell, car battery, DC generator etc.
Source of AC are AC generator, bicycle dynamos etc.
(c) An important advantage of AC over DC is that AC can be transmitted over long distances
without much loss of electrical energy.
(d) 50Hz.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:105

Question 37:
A coil is connected to a galvanometer. When the N-pole of a magnet is pushed into the coil, the
galvanometer deflected to the right. What deflection, if any, is observed when :
(a) the N-pole is removed ?
(b) the S-pole is inserted ?
(c) the magnet is at rest in the coil ?
State three ways of increasing the deflection on the galvanometer.
Solution :
(a) The galvanometer deflects to the left.
(b) The galvanometer deflects to the left.
(c) No deflection in galvanometer.
The deflection in the galvanometer can be increased by
i. increasing the number of turns in the coil
i. using a strong magnet
ii. increasing the speed with which magnet is moved in the coil.

Question 38:
When the magnet shown in the diagram below is moving towards the coil, the galvanometer



gives a reading to the right.

(i) What is the name of the effect being produced by the moving magnet ?
(ii) State what happens to the reading shown on the galvanometer when the magnet is moving
away from the coil.
(iii) The original experiment is repeated. This time the magnet is moved towards the coil at a
great speed. State two changes you would notice in the reading on the galvanometer.
Solution :
(i) Electromagnetic induction.
(ii) The galvanometer gives a reading to the left.
(iii) Large deflection to right occurs more quickly.

Question 39:
If you hold a coil of wire next to a magnet, no current will flow in the coil. What else is needed
to induce a current ?
Solution :
Relative motion between the coil and the magnet.

Question 40:
The wire in Figure below is being moved downwards through the magnetic field so as to
produce induced current.

What would be the effect of :
(a) moving the wire at a higher speed ?
(b) moving the wire upwards rather than downwards ?
(c) using a stronger magnet ?
(d) holding the wire still in the magnetic field ?
(e) moving the wire parallel to the magnetic field lines ?
Solution :
(a) Current increased.
(b) Current reversed.
(c) Current increased.
(d) Zero current.
(e) Zero current.

Question 41:
Two coils A and B of insulated wire are kept close to each other. Coil A is connected to a
galvanometer while coil B is connected to a battery through a key. What would happen if :
(i) a current is passed through coil B by plugging the key ?



(ii) the current is stopped by removing the plug from the key ?
Explain your answer mentioning the name of the phenomenon involved.
Solution :
(i) Galvanometer pointer moves to one side showing that a momentary current is induced in
the coil A.
(ii) Galvanometer pointer moves to the other side showing that the direction of momentarily
induced current has been reversed.
The phenomenon taking place here is electromagnetic induction. When the current is passed
through coil B or is stopped, the magnetic field linked with coil A changes due to which an
induced current is produced in the coil.

Question 42:
A portable radio has a built-in transformer so that it can. work from the mains instead of
batteries. Is this a step-up or step down transformer ?
Solution :
Step-down transformer (which reduces the voltage).

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:113

Question 1:
What name is given to the device which automatically cuts off the electricity supply during
short-circuiting in household wiring ?
Solution :
Electric fuse.

Question 2:
What is the usual capacity of an electric fuse used (z) in the lighting circuit, and (ii) in the
power circuit, of a small house ?
Solution :
(i) 5A
(ii) 15A.

Question 3:
Give the symbol of an electric fuse used in circuit diagrams.
Solution :

Question 4:
State whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) A wire with a green insulation is usually the live wire.
(b) A miniature circuit breaker (MCB) works on the heating effect of current.
Solution :
(a) False.
(b) False.

Question 5:
Along with live wire and neutral wire, a third wire is also used in domestic electric wiring. What
name is given to this third wire ?
Solution :



Earth wire

Question 6:
List the colours of the three wires in the cable connected to the plug of an electric iron.
Solution :
Red wire – Live wire.
Black wire – Neutral wire.
Green wire – Earth wire.

Question 7:
What is the electric potential of the neutral wire in a mains supply cable ?
Solution :
Zero volt.

Question 8:
If fuses of 250 mA, 500 mA, 1 A, 5 A and 10 A were available, which one would be the most
suitable for protecting an amplifier rated at 240 V, 180 W ?
Solution :
P = VI
I = P/V = 180/240 = 0.75A
The fuse wire should be such that it is able to withstand only a little more current than 0.75A.
So the fuse of 1A is the most suitable.

Question 9:
When does an electric short circuit occur ?
Solution :
Short circuit occurs when live wire and neutral wire come in contact with each other.

Question 10:
In which wire in an A.C. housing circuit is the switch introduced to operate the lights ?
Solution :
Live wire.

Question 11:
In household circuits, is a fuse wire connected in series or in parallel ?
Solution :
In series.

Question 12:
Usually three insulated wires of different colours are used in an electrical appliance. Name the
three colours.
Solution :
Red, black and green.

Question 13:
What is the usual colour of the insulation of: (a) live wire, (b) neutral wire, and (c) earth wire ?
Solution :
(a)red
(b)black
(c)green

Question 14:



What is the main purpose of earthing an electrical appliance ?
Solution :
To avoid the risk of electric shocks.

Question 15:
Give two reasons why different electrical appliances in a domestic circuit are connected in
parallel.
Solution :
(i) In case of parallel connection, if one of the appliances is switched off, other appliances keep
on operating.
(ii) In case of parallel connection, all the appliances are operated on same voltage i.e., the
mains supply voltage.

Question 16:
How should the electric lamps in a building be connected so that the switching on or off in a
room has no effect on other lamps in the same building ?
Solution :
Parallel connection.

Question 17:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) A fuse should always be placed in the……. wire of a mains circuit.
(b) The earth wire should be connected to the……. of an appliance.
Solution :
(a) live
(b) body.

Question 18:
(a) Of what substance is the fuse wire made ? Why ?
(b) Explain why, a copper wire cannot be used as a fuse wire.
Solution :
(a) The fuse wire is made of tin-plated copper wire because of its low melting point.
(b) Pure copper wire cannot be used as a fuse wire because it has a high melting point due to
which it will not melt easily when a short circuit takes place.

Question 19:
What type of electric fuse is used in electrical appliances like car stereos ? Explain with the
help of a labelled diagram.
Solution :
Cartridge fuse.
It consists of a glass tube T having a thin fuse wire sealed inside it. The glass tube has two
metal caps at its two ends. The two ends of the fuse wire are connected to these metal caps.
The metal caps are for connecting the fuse in the circuit in a suitably made bracket.

Question 20:
Distinguish between the terms ‘overloading’ and ‘short-circuiting ‘ as used in domestic circuits.
Solution :



Live wire coming in contact with the neutral wire is known as short circuit.
When too many electrical appliances of high power rating are switched on at the same time or
are connected to a single socket, they draw extremely large current. This is known as
overloading.

Question 21:
(a) When does a fuse cut off current ? How does it do it ?
(b) What is the maximum number of 60 W bulbs that can be run from the mains supply of 220
volts if you do not want to overload a 5 A fuse ?
Solution :
(a) A fuse cuts off current when the current exceeds a safe value (due to short circuiting or
overloading). When the current becomes large, it heats the fuse wire too much. Since the
melting point of fuse wire is low, it melts and breaks the circuit. Thus, current in the circuit is
cut off.
(b) Let the maximum number of bulbs be y.
Power of y bulbs, P=60y
V=220V, I=5A
We know that
P = VI
60y = 220 x 5
60y = 1100
y=18.33
So, number of bulbs required are 18.

Question 22:
Explain the importance of using in a household electric circuit (i) fuse, and (ii) earthing wire.
Solution :
(i) A fuse is one of most important protection devices, which is used for avoiding the damages
happening due to over load or short circuit.
(ii) An earthing wire is used to save us from the risk of electric shock in case the live wire
touches the metal case of the electric appliance.

Question 23:
(a) An electric iron is rated at 230 V, 750 W. Calculate (i) the maximum current, and (ii) the
number of units
of electricity it would use in 30 minutes.
(b) Which of the following fuse ratings would be suitable for this electric iron ?
1 A, 3 A, 5 A, 13 A
Solution :
(a) V=230V, P=750 W, t=30/60=0.5hr
(i) Let max current be I
We have P=VI
750 =230xI
I= 3.26 A
(ii) Electric energy consumed, E = Pxt = 0.75kW x 0.5h = 0.375 kWh
No. of units used in 30 min = 0.375
(b) 5 A fuse rating will be suitable for this electric iron as the maximum current for this iron is
3.26 A.

Question 24:
What is the function of an earth wire ? Why is it necessary to earth the metallic bodies of
electrical appliances ?



Solution :
When the live wire of a faulty appliance comes in direct contact with its metallic case, which
has been earthed, the large current passes directly to the earth without passing through the
user’s body. Thus, it is necessary to earth the metallic bodies of electrical appliances so as to
avoid fatal electric shocks.

Question 25:
(a) What current is taken by a 3 kW electric geyser working on 240 V mains ?
(b) What size fuse should be used in the geyser circuit ?
Solution :
(a) P = 3kW = 3000W
V = 240V
P = V x I
I = P/V
= 3000/240 = 12.5 A.
(b) A 13A fuse should be used in the geyser circuit.

Question 26:
(a) Why are fuses fitted in the fuse box of a domestic electricity supply ?
(b) What device could be used in place of the fuses ?
Solution :
(a) Fuses are fitted in the fuse box of a domestic electricity supply to protect the whole wiring
of the house when excessive current flows in the circuit.
(b) MCB.

Question 27:
(a) Draw a labelled diagram to show the domestic electric wiring from an electric pole to a
room. Give the
wiring for a bulb and a three-pin socket only.
(b) State two hazards associated with the use of electricity.
(c) State the important precautions which should be observed in the use of electricity.
(d) What will you do if you see a person coming in contact with a live wire ?
(e) Explain why, electric switches should not be operated with wet hands.
Solution :
(a)

(b) Two hazards associated with the use of electricity are:
i. If a person happens to touch a live electric wire, he gets a severe electric shock.
ii. Short-circuiting due to damanged wiring or overloading of the circuit can cause electrical fire
in a building.
(c) Important precautions which should be observed in the use of electricity are:
(i) Use of good quality wires
(ii) Use of fuse and proper earthing.
(iii) Use of appliances in dry condition only.



(d) If a person comes in contact with a live wire, we will switch off the main switch immediately
so as to cut off the electricity supply..
(e) Electric switches should not be operated with wet hands because water is a good
conductor of electricity, so the user may get electric shock.

Question 38:
An air-conditioner of 3.2 kW power rating is connected to a domestic electric circuit having a
current rating of 10 A. The voltage of power supply is 220 V. What will happen when this air-
conditioner is switched on ? Explain your answer.
Solution :
Given: P=3.2kW=3200W, Fuse current rating=10 A, V=220 V
We have
P=VI
3200 = 220 x I
I=14.54 A
As the required current for the air-conditioner is 14.54A and the rated current of the fuse is
10A, so the fuse will blow cutting off the power supply.

Question 39:
Three appliances are connected in parallel to the same source which provides a voltage of 220
V. A fuse connected to the source will blow if the current from the source exceeds 10 A. If the
three appliances are rated at 60 W, 500 W and 1200 W at 220 V, will the fuse blow ?
Solution :
P1=60 W, P2=1200W, P3=500W
Fuse rating = 10A
V=220V
We have, P=VI
Total power=60+1200+500=1760W
Therefore, 1760=220xI
I=8A
The required current is 8A and fuse rating is 10A. So, all the appliances will work normally and
the fuse will not blow.

Question 40:
A vacuum cleaner draws a current of 2 A from the mains supply.
(a) What is the appropriate value of the fuse to be fitted in its circuit ?
(b) What will happen if a 13 A fuse is fitted in its circuit ?
Solution :
(a) The appropriate value of the fuse to be fitted in the circuit is 2.5A or 3A.
(b) If a 13A fuse is fitted in the circuit, it will not protect the vacuum cleaner against the very
high current flowing through it. This may damage the appliance.

Question 41:
Which of the following circuits will still be dangerous even if the fuse blows off and electric
iron stops working during a short circuit ?



Solution :
Circuit A is not dangerous after fuse blows because fuse is fitted in the live wire; but circuit B is
dangerous even if fuse blows because the fuse is in the neutral wire.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:116

Question 42:
An electric kettle rated as 1200 W at 220 V and a toaster rated at 1000 W at 220 V are both
connected in parallel to a source of 220 V. If the fuse connected to the source blows when the
current exceeds 9.0 A, can both appliances be used at the same time ? Illustrate your answer
with calculations.
Solution :
P1=1200W, P2=1000W
V=220V
Fuse rating=9A
We know, P=VI
Total current required,
I=P/V
=(P1+P2)/V
=(1200+1000)/220
=10A
If both the appliances are switched on together, the fuse will get burnt. So, both the appliance
cannot be used at same time.

Question 43:
What is the main difference in the wiring of an electric bulb and a socket for using an electric
iron in a domestic electric circuit ? What is the reason for this difference ?
Solution :
No earth connection is required for the bulb connection as it does not draw heavy current and
we hardly touch it. A socket for using an electric iron has an earth connection because electric
iron has a metallic body and draws a large current.

Question 44:
(a) Explain why, it is more dangerous to touch the live wire of a mains supply rather than the
neutral wire.
(b) Why is it safe for birds to sit on naked power lines fixed atop tall electric poles ?
Solution :
(a) It is more dangerous to touch the live wire rather than the neutral wire because live wire has
a high potential of 220V, where as neutral wire has zero potential.
(b) Bird’s body is not connected to the earth, so no current flows through its body into the
earth. So, it is safe for birds to sit on naked power lines fixed atop tall electric poles.

Question 45:
A domestic lighting circuit has a fuse of 5 A. If the mains supply is at 230 V, calculate the
maximum number of 36 W tube-lights that can be safely used in this circuit.
Solution :
Let the maximum number of tube-lights be y.
Power of y tube-lights, P=36y
V=230V, I=5A
We know that
P = VI
36y = 230 x 5
36y = 1500
y=31.94
So, number of tube-lights required are 31.



How do OrganismsReproduce

Question 1:
Which life process ensures that a plant or animal species will not disappear from this earth ?
Solution :
Reproduction.

Question 2:
What is the name of the reproductive process :
(a) which involves two parents ?
(b) which involves only one parent ?
Solution :
(a) Sexual reproduction.
(b) Asexual reproduction.

Question 3:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Spores produced by the bread mould plant are actually its seeds.
Solution :
False.

Question 4:
Most of the plants reproduce by sexual method. Name two plants which can reproduce
asexually.
Solution :
Ferns and mosses.

Question 5:
Which type of reproduction :
(a) involves gametes ? .
(b) does not involve gametes ?

Solution :
(a) Sexual reproduction.
(b) Asexual reproduction.

Question 6:
State whether human beings reproduce by sexual method or asexual method.
Solution :
Sexual method.

Question 7:
(a) Name two animals which reproduce sexually.
(b) Name two animals which reproduce asexually.
Solution :
(a) Dogs and cows.
(b) Amoeba and Hydra.



Question 8:
Name one organism which reproduces by spore formation.’
Solution :
Bread mould (Rhizopus fungus).

Question 9:
Name the method by which Paramecium reproduces. Is this method sexual or asexual ?
Solution :
Binary fission; Asexual method.

Question 10:
Name two plants :
(a) which can be grown from their broken stems.
(b) which can be grown from their leaves.
Solution :
(a) Bryophyllum and money plant.
(b) Bryophyllum and Begonia

Question 11:
Name the asexual method of reproduction in yeast.
Solution :
Budding.

Question 12:
Name the asexual method of reproduction in (a) Hydra, and (b) Plasmodium.
Solution :
(a) Budding and regeneration. (b) Multiple fission.

Question 13:
What is the name of asexual reproduction method in :
(i) Spirogyra, and (ii) Leishmania ?
Solution :
(i) Fragmentation.
(ii) Binary fission.

Question 14:



Name the artificial propagation mehod used for the propagation of (a) rose plants, and (b)
apple trees.
Solution :
(a) Cutting.
(b) Grafting.

Question 15:
Which artificial propagation method is used for the production of jasmine plants ?
Solution :
Layering.

Question 16:
Name the natural method by which strawberry plants are propagated.
Solution :
Layering.

Question 17:
Name two plants which are propagated by layering method.
Solution :
Hibiscus and Bougainvillea.

Question 18:
Name any two plants which are propagated by cuttings method.
Solution :
Rose and grapes.

Question 19:
Write down the different methods of asexual reproduction.
Solution :
The different methods of asexual reproduction are:(i) Fission(ii) Budding.(iii) Spore formation.
(iv) Regeneration.(v) Fragmentation.(vi) Vegetative propagation.

Question 20:
Why are budding, fragmentation and regeneration, all considered to be asexual type of
reproduction ?
Solution :
Because all these methods involves a single parent for the production of a new organism,
without the involvement of gametes.

Question 21:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The process of………ensures continuity of life on earth.
(b) Plasmodium reproduces by the process of……..fission whereas Paramecium reproduces by
the process
of……….fission.
(c) Rose plants and sugar cane crop are usually grown by the………..method.
(d) Vegetative reproduction of potato plants is done by using………..
(e) Strawberry plants are propagated by the natural………..method.
Solution :
(a) Reproduction.
(b) Multiple; Binary.
(c) Cutting.



(d) Tubers.
(e) Layering.

Question 22:
a) What is the basic difference between asexual reproduction and sexual reproduction ?
(b) Which of the following organisms reproduce by sexual method and which by asexual
method ?
Amoeba, Cats, Humans, Hydra, Birds
Solution :
(a)
Asexual Reproduction
(i) The offspring arises from a single parent.
(ii) The production of new organism does not involve gametes
Example:- Amoeba, Yeast.
Sexual Reproduction
(i) The offspring arises from two parents of different sexes.
(ii) The production of new organisms involves the use of gametes.
Example:- Fish, Frogs, etc.
(b)
(i) Sexual Method: Cats, Humans, birds.
(ii) Asexual method: Amoeba, Hydra.

Question 23:
(a) What is meant by regeneration ? Name two animals which can regenerate fully from their
cut body
parts.
(b) Explain why, more complex multicellular organisms cannot give rise to new organisms
through regeneration.
Solution :
(a) The process of getting back a full organism from its body parts is called regeneration. The
two animals which can regenerate fully from the cut body parts are ? Planaria and Hydra.(b)In
complex multicellular organisms, specialized cells makeup tissues; tissues makeup organs;
organs makeup organs systems and finally organs systems makeup organisms. Since
complex Multi cellular organisms have a high degree of organisation in their body, they cannot
be reproduced from their cut body parts by the process of regeneration.

Question 24:
Explain vegetative propagation with the help of two examples. List two advantages of
vegetative propagation.
Solution :
In vegetative propagation, new plants are obtained from the parts of old plants (stems, roots
and leaves), without the help of reproductive organs. Example ? Bryophyllum plant reproduces
from its leaves and money plant grows from its stem. Advantages of vegetative propagation:-
(i) Plants grow faster by the process of vegetative propagation. (ii) They need less care.

Question 25:
(a) What is meant by the term ‘artificial propagation of plants’ ?
(b) Name three common methods which are used for the artificial propagation of plants.
(c) Name two plants which are usually propagated by artificial propagation methods. Name
the method of artificial propagation used in each case.
Solution :
(a) The process of growing many plants from one plant by man-made methods is called



artificial propagation of plants. (b) The methods used for artificial propagation of plants are:
(i) Cutting
(ii) Layering and
(iii) Grafting
(c)
(i) Rose grows by means of cutting.
(ii) Jasmine grows by layering

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:142

Question 26:
Describe the layering method for the artificial propagation of plants. Illustrate your answer with
the help of a labelled diagram. Name any five plants which are propagated by the layering
method.
Solution :
Layering – In this method, a branch of the plant is pulled towards the ground and the part of it
is covered with moist soil leaving the tip of the branch exposed above the ground. After some
time, new roots develop from the part of the branch buried in the soil. The branch is then cut
off from the parent plant. The part of the plant which has developed roots grows to become a
new plant. The layering method is used for the propagation of plants like Jasmine, Strawberry,
Raspberry, Lemon and Guava.

Question 27:
(a) What is meant by the term ‘fission’ as used in biology ?
(b) How does binary fission differ from multiple fission ?
(c) Name one organism which reproduces by binary fission and another which reproduces by
multiple fission.
(d) State whether the above named organisms are animals or plants.
Solution :
(a) Fission means the splitting of an organism into two new organisms.(b)
Binary Fission
(i) In binary fission, the parent organism splits to form two new organisms.
(ii) It occurs during normal conditions.
Multiple Fission
(i) In multiple fission, the parent organisms splits to form many new organisms.
(ii)It takes place during unfavorable conditions.
(c) Amoeba reproduces by binary fission and Plasmodium reproduces by multiple fission. (d)
Both the above mentioned organisms are animals.

Question 28:
(a) Can you consider cell division as a type of reproduction in unicellular organisms ? Give
reason.



(b) What is a clone ? Why do offsprings formed by asexual reproduction exhibit remarkable
similarity ?
Solution :
(a) Yes, because it leads to the formation two daughter cells.(b) The new organisms produced
by one parent through asexual reproduction (which are genetically identical to the parent) are
called clones. The offspring’s formed by asexual reproduction exhibit remarkably similarity
because the replication of DNA in the cells is done by certain biochemical reactions which
synthesise more of genetic material. When the DNA already present in the nucleus of the
parent cell is replicated by making more DNA at the time of asexual reproduction then slight
variations come in the two copies formed. Due to this the two DNA molecules formed will be
similar but not identical.

Question 29:
(a) The yeast cells fail to multiply in water but they multiply rapidly in sugar solution. Give one
reason for
it.
(b) Why does bread mould grow profusely on a moist slice of bread but not on a dry slice of
bread ?
Solution :
(a) Water does not provide any energy to the yeast cells. So, yeast cells fail to multiply in water
due to inadequate energy in its cells. Sugar provides energy to them to carry out reproduction
by multiplying rapidly.
(b) Moisture is necessary for the growth of bread mould. The moist slice of bread provides
both moisture and nutrients due to which bread mould grows profusely. On the other hand, the
dry slice of bread provides nutrients but no moisture. So, in the absence of moisture, bread
mould does not grow on the dry slice of bread.

Question 30:
(a) What is a tuber ? Name one stem tuber and one root tuber.
(b) What is name of the organ of propagation present in a tuber ?
(c) Name one commonly used vegetable which is propagated by using tubers.
Solution :
a) A tuber is the thickened, underground stem (or root) of a plant which is swollen with stored
food. Stem tuber: Potato; Root tuber: Sweet potato. (b) Buds. (c) Potatoes.

Question 31:
(a) What is meant by vegetative propagation ?
(b) Vegetative propagation involves the growth and development of ‘something’ present in the
old part of the plant to form a new plant. What is this ‘something’ ?
(c) Why do green grass plants spring up in dry fields on their own after the rains ?
Solution :
(a) Vegetative propagation is an asexual method of reproduction in which new plants are
obtained from the parts of old plants (like stems, roots and leaves) without the help of any
reproductive organs.
(b) Buds.
(c) The fields have dry stems of the old grass plants all over them. These dry stems have buds
which are in the inactive state. By getting rainwater, the buds present on the dry grass stems
get activated and grow to produce new grass plants.

Question 32:
(a) Explain how, new Bryophyllum plants can be produced from the leaves of the old plant ?
Illustrate your



answer with the help of a labelled diagram.
(b) How can you grow money plant bv vegetative propagation ?
Solution :
(a) Bryophyllum can be reproduced by vegetative propagation by using either a piece of its
stem or leaves. The leaves of a Bryophyllum plant have special buds in their margins which
may get detached from the leaves, fall to the ground and then grow to produce a new plant.

(b) Money plant can be grown by vegetative propagation by using a piece of its stem which has
at least one leaf on it. One end of the stem is dipped in water and after a few days new roots
appear at the point where the leaf was attached. This piece of stem grows gradually into a
new money plant.

Question 33:
Match the organisms given in column I with the methods of reproduction/propagation given in
column II:

Solution :
(i) – (j)
(ii) – (g)
(iii) – (f)
(iv) – (k)
(v) – (b)
(vi) – (h)
(vii) – (a)
(viii) – (d)
(ix) – (c)
(x) – (e)
(xi) – (i)
(xii) – (i)



Question 34:
(a) What is meant by reproduction ?
(b) What are the two general methods of reproduction in organisms ?
(c) How does an Amoeba reproduce ? Describe the process of reproduction in Amoeba with
the help of labelled diagrams of different stages in its reproduction process.
(d) What is the name of the process by which Amoeba reproduces ?
(e) Name two organisms which reproduce by the same asexual process as that of Amoeba.
Solution :
(a) Theproduction of new organisms from the existing organisms of the same species is
known as reproduction.
(b) The two methods of reproduction in living organisms are asexual reproduction and sexual
reproduction.
(c) Amoeba reproduces by binary fission by dividing its body into two parts. When the amoeba
cell reaches its maximum size, the nucleus of amoeba lengthens and divides into two parts.
After that the cytoplasm of amoeba divides into two parts, one part around each nucleus. In
this way one parent amoeba divides to form two smaller amoebae.

(d) Binary fission.
(e) Paramecium and Leishmania.

Question 35:
(a) What is the difference between the two asexual methods of reproduction : fission and
fragmentation ?
(b) Name one organism which reproduces by fission and another which reproduces by
fragmentation.
(c) What is meant by multiple fission ? Name one organism which reproduces by the process
of multiple fission.
(d) Describe the process of reproduction in Hydra with the help of labelled diagrams. What is
the name of this process of reproduction ?
(e) Name one unicellular organism which reproduces by the same asexual process as Hydra.
Solution :
(a)
Fission
(i) It is a process in which an organism splits to form two or more new organisms.
(ii) Fission occurs in unicellular organisms.
Example : Amoeba.
Fragmentation
(i) It is a process in which the body breaks up into two or more pieces on maturing, each of
which subsequently grows to form a complete new organism.
(ii) It takes place in multicellular organisms.
Example : Spirogyra.
(b) Amoeba reproduces by fission and spirogyra reproduces by fragmentation.
(c) Multiple fission is a process in which a parent organism splits to form many new
organisms at the same time. Plasmodium reproduces by multiple fission.
(d) Hydra reproduces by budding. In hydra, first a small outgrowth called bud is formed on the
side of its body by repeated mitotic divisions of its cells. This bud then grows gradually to form



a small hydra by developing a mouth and tentacles. The tiny new hydra detaches itself from
the parent body and develops into a separate organism.

(e) Yeast.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:143

Question 36:
(a) Name the method by which bread mould (Rhizopus fungus) reproduces. Is this method
sexual or asexual ?
(b) What is yeast ? Describe the process of reproduction in yeast with the help of labelled
diagrams.
(c) Name a tiny fresh-water animal which reproduces by the same method as that of yeast ?
What is this method known as ?
(d) Name two marine organisms which also reproduce by the same method as yeast but form
colonies.
Solution :
(a) Spore formation; asexual reproduction.
(b) Yeast is tiny, unicellular non green plant which reproduces by budding. In yeast, first a bud
appears on the outside of the cell wall. The nucleus of the parent yeast cell divides into two
parts and one part of the nucleus moves into the bud. Ultimately, the bud separates off from
the parent yeast cell and forms a new yeast cell.

(c) Hydra; Budding.
(d) Sponge and corals.

Question 37:
(a) What is meant by ‘grafting’ as a means of propagation in plants ?
(b) Define ‘stock’ and ‘scion’.
(c) Describe the grafting method for the artificial propagation of plants with the help of labelled
diagrams.
(d) Name two fruit trees which are usually propagated by grafting method.
(e) State two advantages of grafting method of artificial propagation of plants.
(f) What is the difference between the cuttings method and grafting method for the artificial
propagation of plants ?
Solution :
(a) Grafting – It is a method in which the cut stems of two different plants (one with roots and
other without roots) are joined together in such a way that the stems join and grow as a single



plant.
(b) The cut stem of a plant having roots is called stock and the cut stem of the other plant
without roots is called scion.
(c) In grafting, two plants are chosen which are used as scion and stock. First the stem is
removed from the plant chosen to be made scion by giving a slanting cut. The scion is placed
over the stock and is fitted together by binding tightly by a piece of cloth or plastic sheet. The
cut soon heals and the stock and scion of two plants grow together to become one plant.

(d) Banana and pineapple.
(e) Advantages of grafting method:
(i) It enables us to combine the most desirable characteristics of the two plants in its flowers
and fruits.
(ii) It can be used to produce varieties of seedless fruits.(f)
Cutting
Grafting
(i) A small part of the plant which is removed by making a cut with a sharp knife is called
cutting.(ii) The new plant formed is exactly similar to the parent plant.
(i) It is a method in which the cut stems of two different plants (one with roots and other
without roots) are joined together in such a way that the stems join and grow as a single plant.
(ii) The new plant produced has the characteristics of both the parent plants.

Question 38:
(a) What is tissue culture ?
(b) Name any four types of ornamental plants which are being produced by tissue culture
technique.
(c) What is the importance of DNA copying in reproduction ? Explain with an example.
(d) How does reproduction help in providing stability to populations of species ?
(e) Why is variation during reproduction beneficial to the species but not necessarily for the
individual ?
Solution :
(a) The production of new plants from a small piece of plant tissue (or cells) removed from the
growing tips of a plant in a suitable growth medium is called tissue culture.
(b) Orchids, dahlia, carnation, chrysanthemum.
(c)
(i) The chromosomes in the nucleus of a cell contains information for the inheritance of
features from the parents to the next generation in the form of DNA molecules so the
characteristics of a parent organism are transmitted to their offsprings.
(ii) When the DNA already present in the nucleus of a parent cell is copied by making more of
DNA by certain biochemical reactions, then slight variations come in the two copies formed.
Thus, variations are produced in the offspring’s during reproduction which form the basis of
evolution. Example: Offspring’s produced by asexual reproduction have slight variations from
their parents.
(d) The process of reproduction introduces some variations in the individual organisms of a



species which enables them to survive even in adverse environmental conditions such as
excessive heat or cold, etc. In this way, the introduction of variations during reproduction
provides stability to the populations of various species.
(e) Variation is useful for the survival of species even in adverse environmental conditions.
This happens as follows: There may be some drastic changes like excessive heat or cold etc in
the habitat of a species of organisms. If all the organisms of a population living in that habitat
are exactly identical, then there is a danger that all of them may die and no one would survive
under these conditions. This will eliminate the species from that habitat completely however, if
some variations are present in some individual organisms to tolerate these drastic changes
then there is a chance for them to survive and flourish even in adverse environment. Example:
Certain bacteria living in temperate water – If the temperature of water increases too much
due to global warming most of them will not be able to tolerate excessive heat and would die
however, if there are bacteria with variation then there is a chance for them to survive.

Question 39:
(a) What is a ‘cutting’ in respect of plants for propagation purposes ?
(b) What care should be taken while making a cutting from a plant ?
(c) Describe the cuttings method for the artificial propagation of plants. Illustrate your answer
with the help of labelled diagrams.
(d) Name any two plants which are usually propagated by the cuttings method.
Solution :
(a) A small part of the plant which is removed by making a cut with a sharp knife is called
cutting. (b) While making a cutting, care should be taken to see that there are some buds on it.
(c) In this method, a cutting of the parent plant having some buds on it is taken and its lower
part is buried in the moist soil. After few days, the cutting develops roots and shoot, and grows
into a new plant which is exactly similar to the parent plant.
3
(d) Rose and Bougainvillea.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:168

Question 1:
Where are a plant’s sex organs located ?
Solution :
In flowers.

Question 2:
What is the function of a flower ?
Solution :
The function of a flower is to make male and female gametes and to ensure that fertilisation
will take place to make new seeds for the reproduction of plant.

Question 3:
What are the reproductive organs in a flower ?
Solution :



Stamen and carpel.

Question 4:
What is the name of :
(a) male part of a flower ?
(b) female part of a flower ?
Solution :
(i) Stamen.
(ii) Carpel.

Question 5:
What is the name of female organ of a flower (other than carpel) ?
Solution :
Pistil.

Question 6:
What is the other name of sex cells ?
Solution :
Gametes.

Question 7:
What is the name of sex cells (other than gametes) ?
Solution :
Germ cells.

Question 8:
Name the male and female gametes in animals.
Solution :
The male gamete in animals is sperm and the female gamete is ovum (egg).

Question 9:
Where is the male gamete formed :
(i) in humans ?
(ii) in flowering plants ?
Solution :
(i) Testes.
(ii) Anther.

Question 10:
Where is the female gamete formed :
(i) in humans ?
(ii) in flowering plants ?
Solution :
(i) Ovary.
(ii) Ovary.

Question 11:
Name two animals which undergo external fertilisation and two animals which undergo
internal fertilisation ?
Solution :
(i) External fertilisation: Frog and fish
(ii) Internal fertilisation: Dogs and cows.



Question 12:
Define sexual reproduction.
Solution :
The reproduction which takes place by the combination of special reproductive cells called
‘sex cells’ is called sexual reproduction.

Question 13:
Do all organisms give birth to individuals like humans ?
Solution :
No. All organisms do not give birth to individuals like humans.

Question 14:
Write the full forms of the following as they occur in biology :
(i) STD (ii) AIDS (iii) HIV
Solution :
(i) STD – Sexually Transmitted Diseases. (ii) AIDS – Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.
(iii) HIV – Human Immunodeficiency virus.

Question 15:
What is the causative organism for the following diseases ?
(i) Gonorrhoea (ii) Syphilis (iii) AIDS
Solution :
(i) Bacteria.
(ii) Bacteria.
(iii) Virus.

Question 16:
What are the organs in humans which produce the gametes ?
Solution :
Testes in males and ovaries in females.

Question 17:
(a) What are the male sex cells in humans called ?
(b) Name the organ which produces male sex cells.
Solution :
(a) Sperms.
(b) Testes.

Question 18:
(a) What are the female sex cells in humans called ?
(b) Name the organ which produces female sex cells.
Solution :
(a) Eggs.
(b) Ovaries.

Question 19:
Which part of the human body :
(a) produces sperms ?
(b) produces ova ?
(c) passes Sperms from a man to a woman ?
Solution :
(a) Testes.



(b) Ovaries.
(c) Penis.

Question 20:
(a) What do the testes in a man produce ?
(b) What do the ovaries in a woman produce ?
Solution :
(a) Sperms.
(b) Ova (eggs).

Question 21:
(a) Where in the human body does an ovum get fertilised ?
(b) Where does a fertilised ovum develop into a baby in the human body ?
Solution :
(a) Oviduct (fallopian tube).
(b) Uterus (womb).

Question 22:
Name the liquid that contains sperms
Solution :
Semen.

Question 23:
What is the name of the process in which thickened uterus lining alongwith blood vessels is
removed from the body of a human female through vaginal bleeding
Solution :
Menstruation.

Question 24:
(a) For how much time does menstruation last in human females (or women) ?
(b) What is the frequency of menstrua] cycle in human females (or women) ?
Solution :
(a) 3 to 5 days.
(b) Once every 28 days.

Question 25:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Pollen grains contain………… gametes of a plant.
(b) Ovules contain………… gametes of a plant.
(c) The ovary of a flower becomes………… after fertilisation.
(d) The ovule becomes a……. after fertilisation.
(e) Flowering plants reproduce by…………. method of reproduction.
(f) The female organ of reproduction in the flower is the………………
(g) The male organ of reproduction in the flower is the……………….
(h) The name of the structure in the flower in which the male gamete is formed is…………
(i) The………. at the base of the carpel contains egg cells.
(j) The term used to refer to the transfer of pollen from the stamen of one flower to the carpel
of another
flower of the same species is………….
(k) The cells involved in sexual reproduction are called……………
(l) Fusion of gametes gives rise to a single cell called …………..
(m) The process of fusion of gametes is called…………



(n) A multicellular animal starts its life from a……….. through sexual reproduction.
(o) The union of a sperm nucleus with an egg nucleus is known as…………… and results in
a……………. egg.
(p) The menstrual cycle is controlled by……………..
Solution :
(a) Male.
(b) Female.
(c) Fruit.
(d) Seed.
(e) Sexual.
(f) Carpel.
(g) Stamen.
(h) Anther.
(i) Ovary.
(j) Cross pollination.
(k) Gametes.
(l) Zygote.
(m) Fertilisation.
(n) Single cell (zygote).
(o) Fertilisation; fertilised.
(p) Hormones.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:169

Question 26:
(a) What are gametes ?
(b) In which sort of reproduction are gametes involved ?
(c) What is formed when two gametes fuse ?
(d) What is this act of fusion called ?
Solution :
(a) The cells involved in sexual reproduction are called gametes. (b) Sexual reproduction. (c)
Zygote is formed when two gametes fuse. (d) Fertilisation.

Question 27:
(a) Write the names of (a) male sex hormone, and (b) female sex hormones.
(b) What name is given to the fusion of sperm and ovum ?
(c) Name the tissue through which the foetus gets all the requirements from the mother’s
body.
Solution :
(a)
(i) Testosterone.
(ii) Oestrogen and Progesterone.
(b) Fertilisation.
(c) Placenta.

Question 28:
(a) Draw a neat sketch of the stamen of a flower. Mark in it filament and anther.
(b) Draw a neat sketch of the carpel of a flower. Mark in it stigma, style and ovary.
(c) What is made in (i) anther, and (ii) ovary, of a flower ?
Solution :
(a)



(b)

(c)
(i)Male gametes(insides pollen).
(ii) Female gametes (inside ovum).

Question 29:
(a) Explain the terms ‘self pollination’ and ‘cross-pollination’ ?
(b) How do the insects help in cross-pollination ?
(c) How is the process of pollination different from fertilization ?
Solution :
(a)
(i) Self pollination ? When the pollen grains from the anther of a flower are transferred to the
stigma of the same flower (or another flower on the same plant), it is called self pollination.
(ii) When the pollen grains from the anther of a flower on one plant are transferred to the
stigma of a flower on another similar plant, it is called cross pollination.
(b) When an insect sits on the flower of a plant for sucking nectar, then the pollen grains from
the anther of this flower sticks to its body. And when this insect sits on another flower of
another similar plant, then the pollen grains sticking to its body are transferred to the stigma of
this second flower. In this way, the insect transfers the pollen grains from the anther of flower
in one plant to the stigma of flower in another plant and causes cross pollination.
(c)

Question 30:
(a) Explain the term ‘fertilisation’.
(b) Give some examples of different modes of fertilisation in nature ?
(c) What type of fertilisation takes place in (i) fish, and (ii) birds ?



Solution :
(a) The fusion of male and female gamete to form zygote during sexual reproduction is called
fertilisation.
(b) Internal and external fertilisation.
(c)
(i) External fertilisation.
(ii) Internal fertilisation.

Question 31:
(a) What are the male and female gonads in human beings ? Mention their functions.
(b) State the advantages of sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction.
Solution :
(a) In males, the gonads are testes. The function of testes is to make sex cells called sperms
and to make sex hormone called testosterone. In females, the gonads are ovaries. The
function of the ovaries is to make mature female sex cell called ova or egg and also to make
female sex hormones called oestrogen and progesterone.
(b) Advantages of sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction:
(i) Sexual reproduction combines DNA from two individuals (male and female) due to which
the offspring has lot of variations. On the other hand, in asexual reproduction, only the DNA of
one individual is copied due to which the variations in the offspring are extremely small.
(ii)Due to lot of variations, sexual reproduction allows species to change to more advanced
forms from one generation to the next and speed up evolution whereas asexual reproduction
does not allow a species to change much from one generation to the next and hence,
evolution becomes very slow.

Question 32:
Describe the various steps involved in the sexual reproduction in animals. Draw labelled
diagrams to show the fertilisation of an ovum (or egg) by a sperm to form a zygote.
Solution :
The sexual reproduction in animals takes place in the following steps:
(i) The male parent produces male gamete called sperms. The sperm is a small cell with a long
tail (flagellum) for movement.
(ii) The female parent produces female gamete called ova which is much bigger cell than the
sperm, having a lot of cytoplasm.
(iii) The sperm enters into the ovum and fuses with it to form a new cell called zygote and this
process is called fertilisation.
(iv) The zygote then divides again and again to form a large number of cells and ultimately the
zygote grows and develops to form a baby.

Question 33:
Why does menstruation occur ? Describe the menstrual cycle in human females (or women).
Solution :
(a) Since the ovary of female release one egg every month, therefore, the uterus also prepares



every month to receive a fertilised egg. The inner lining of the uterus becomes soft and thick
with lots of blood capillaries in it. This preparation is necessary as in case the egg is fertilised
by the sperm, it helps to keep the egg and nourish it. If however, the egg is not fertilised, then
the thick lining of the uterus is not required and the uterus lining breaks down and comes out
through the vagina in the form of blood and mucous. This is called menstruation.
(b) Menstruation cycle in females:
(i) When a girl reaches puberty at the age of 10 ? 12 years, the sex hormones released it her
blood cause some of the ova in the ovaries to become mature.
(ii) Usually one mature egg is released from the ovary into the oviduct once every 28 days. This
is called ovulation.
(iii) Before ovulation, the inner lining of the uterus becomes thick and spongy, and full of blood
capillaries, and prepares itself to receive the fertilised egg.
(iv) If the ovum does not get fertilised, then the thick and soft inner lining of the uterus is no
longer needed and hence it breaks and the dead ovum comes out from vagina in the form of
bleeding called menstruation.
(v) Menstruation usually occurs 14 days after ovulation and usually lasts for 3 to 5 days.
(vi) After menstruation is over, the inner lining of the uterus starts building up again so that it
becomes ready to receive the next ovum in case it gets fertilised.
(vii) If the ovum does not get fertilised even now, then the menstruation takes place again and
this cycle goes on repeating.

Question 34:
(a) Write the various steps involved in the sexual reproduction in plants.
(b) Name two plants which reproduce by sexual reproduction method and two plants which
reproduce by asexual reproduction methods.
Solution :
(a) The sexual reproduction in plants takes place in the following steps:
(i) The male organ of flower called ‘stamen’ makes the male gametes of the flower. These
male gametes are present in pollen grains.
(ii) The female organ of a flower called ‘carpel’ makes the female gametes present in the
ovules and are called ova or egg.
(iii) The male gametes present in the pollen grains fertilises the female gametes or egg cells
present in the ovules.
(iv) The fertilised egg cells grow within ovules and become seeds.
(v) The seeds produce new plants on germination.
(b) Sexual reproduction: Wheat plant and sunflower plant; Asexual reproduction: Ferns and
mosses.

Question 35:
(a) What type of plants reproduce by sexual reproduction method ?
(b) What is a seed ? What are the parts of a seed ? Explain with the help of a labelled diagram.
Solution :
(a) Flowering plants.
(b) A seed is the reproductive unit of a plant (which can be used to grow a new plant). Plumule,
radical and cotyledon are the parts of seed.



Question 36:
(a) What is puberty ? Who attains puberty at an earlier age in human beings : male or female
(boy or girl) ?
(b) Mention two functions each of (i) human testes, and (ii) human ovaries.
Solution :
(a) The age at which the sex hormones begin to be produced and the boy and girl become
sexually mature (able to reproduce) is called puberty. Females attain puberty at an age of 10-
12 years.
(b)
(i) The function of testes is to make sex cells called sperms and to make sex hormone called
testosterone.
(ii) The function of the ovaries is to make mature female sex cell called ova or egg and also to
make female sex hormones called oestrogen and progesterone.

Question 37:
(a) What is gestation period ? How much is the gestation period in humans ?
(b) Name one method of contraception which also protects against sexually transmitted
diseases.
(c) Name one sexually transmitted disease for which no definite cure has been found so far.
What is the causative organism of this disease ?
Solution :
(a) The time period from the fertilisation up to the birth of a baby is called gestation. The
average gestation period in humans is about 9 months (about 38 weeks).
(b) Condoms.
(c) AIDS has no cure. Its causative organism is HIV (human Immunodeficiency Virus).

Question 38:
What are the three types of methods used for birth control (or regulating child birth) ? Give one
example of each type.
Solution :
(a) Barrier method – Condom.
(b) Chemical method – Oral pills.
(c) Surgical method – Vasectomy.

Question 39:
(a) What is the name of surgical method of birth control in human males in which the sperm
ducts are cut and ligated (tied) at both ends ?
(b) What is the name of surgical method of birth control in human females in which the
oviducts are cut and ligated (tied) at both ends ?
(c) Name the contraceptive device used by the human males which acts as a sheath over the
male organ and traps the sperms in it.
(d) Name the contraceptive device used by human females which is put over the cervix.
Solution :



(a) Vasectomy.
(b) Tubectomy.
(c) Condom.
(d) Diaphragm.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:170

Question 40:
(a) Describe the surgical methods of birth control (i) for men, and (ii) for women.
(b) Name two devices used in the barrier method of birth control.
Solution :
(a)
(i) Vasectomy
(ii) Tubectomy.
(b)
(i) Condom
(ii) Diaphragm.

Question 41:
(a) What is meant by contraception ? What are the different methods of contraception ?
(b) What is done in the contraception method known as (i) vasectomy, and (ii) tubectomy ?
(c) If a woman is using copper-T for contraception, will it protect her from sexually transmitted
diseases ?
Solution :
(a) The prevention of pregnancy in women (by preventing fertilisation) is called contraception.
There are 3 methods of contraception:
(i) Barrier method
(ii) Chemical method
(iii) Surgical method.
(b)
(i) Vasectomy – In males, a small portion of the sperm duct (Vasdeferens) is removed by
surgical operation and both the cut ends are ligated properly. This prevents the sperms from
coming out.
(ii) Tubectomy – In females, a small portion of the oviducts is removed by surgical operation
and the cut ends are ligated. This prevents the ovum from entering into the oviducts.
(c) No.

Question 42:
(a) What are sexually transmitted diseases ? Give two examples of sexually transmitted
diseases.
(b) Which method of contraception prevents fertilised egg from being implanted in the uterus ?
Solution :
(a) The diseases which are spread by sexual contact with an infected person are called
Sexually Transmitted Diseases. Example: Aids, Syphilis.
(b) IUCD (Copper – T).

Question 43:
(a) What substances are contained (i) in oral pills, and (ii) in vaginal pills, used as
contraceptives ? How do
they work ?
(b) How does copper-T prevent pregnancy ?
(c) Name the disease caused by HIV.



Solution :
(a) (i) The oral pills contain hormones which stop the ovaries from releasing ovum into the
oviduct. (ii) The vaginal pills contain the chemicals called spermicides which kill the sperm.
(b) Copper- T is effective in preventing pregnancy. It is placed inside the uterus and it prevents
the flow of sperms in the uterus.
(c) AIDS.

Question 44:
(a) What is the name of surgical method of birth control (or preventing pregnancy) which is
carried out (i) in
men, and (ii) in women ?
(b) Name the part of a seed which (i) contains stored food (ii) grows into root, and (iii) grows
into shoot.
Solution :
(a)
(i) Vasectomy
(ii) Tubectomy.
(b)
(i) Cotyledons
(ii) Radicle
(iii) Plumule.

Question 45:
Explain how, offsprings and parents of organisms reproducing sexually have the same number
of chromosomes.
Solution :
The offsprings and parents of organisms reproducing sexually have same number of
chromosomes due to reduction division (meiosis) during gamete formation which reduces the
number of chromosomes into half in both male and female gametes. During fertilisation when
male and female gametes fuse the original numbers of chromosomes as in parents is
restored in the offspring.

Question 46:
In tobacco plant, the male gametes have 24 chromosomes.
(i) What is the number of chromosomes in the female gamete ?
(ii) What is the number of chromosomes in the zygote ?
Solution :
(a) 24.
(b) 48.

Question 47:
(a) What would be the ratio of chromosome number between an egg and its zygote ?
(b) Distinguish between a gamete and a zygote.
Solution :
(a) 1:2.
(b)
Gamete
Gamete represents the sex cell or germ cell in sexual reproduction and it is of two types: Male
gametes (Sperm) and Female gamete (Eee).
Zygote
It is the product of fertilization in which a male and a female gamete fuse with each other.



Question 48:
(a) Fertilisation in humans can occur only once in a month. Why ?
(b) What is the scientific name of (i) womb, and (ii) birth canal ?
Solution :
(a) Fertilisation in humans can occur only once in a month because ovulation takes place once
every month i.e. an egg is released once every month by ovary.
(b)
(i) Uterus.
(ii) Vagina.

Question 49:
The diagram shows female reproductive system. Name the parts labelled A to D.
(a) In which part do the sperms enter ?
(b) Which part releases the egg ?
(c) In which part does fertilisation take place ?
(d) In which part does the foetus develop ?

Solution :
A – Oviduct (Fallopian tube);
B – Ovary;
C – Uterus (Womb);
D – Vagina.
(a) Part D – (Vagina).
(b) Part B – (Ovary).
(c) Part A – Oviduct.
(d) Part C – Uterus.

Question 50:
Why is it an advantage for the testes to be situated in the scrotal sac outside the main body
cavity ? Can you think of one disadvantage ?

Solution :
The testes are situated in the scrotal sac outside the main body cavity because the formation
of sperms requires a lower temperature than the normal body temperature. Its disadvantage
of being outside the main body cavity is that it is more prone to injury.

Question 51:
Which structures in human female are equivalent to the following structures in the male ?
(a) testes (b) vas deferens (c) penis
In each case say in what respect the structures are equivalent ?
Solution :
(a) Ovaries in female; Both make gametes.
(b) Oviducts in females; Both transport gametes.
(c) Vagina in female; Both are copulatory organs.



Question 52:
People who die from AIDS are not killed by the virus itself. Explain.
Solution :
AIDS damages the body’s immune system so that the body becomes weak and cannot protect
itself against infection thus the virus does not kill the humans directly.

Question 53:
(a) What is the life support system of a fetus ?
(b) How long does a human baby take to develop before birth ?
(c) What is the name of the narrow opening between the uterus and the vagina.
Solution :
(a) Placenta.
(b) About 9 months.
(c) Cervix.

Question 54:
(a) What is meant by ‘unisexual flowers’ and ‘bisexual flowers’ ? Give two examples of each.
(b) What is pollination ? How does pollination occur ?
(c) Describe the process of fertilisation in a flower with the help of labelled diagrams.
(d) What changes take place in the flower after fertilisation which lead to the formation of
seeds and fruit ?
Solution :
(a) The flowers which contain only one sex organ, either stamens or carpels are called
unisexual flowers like Papaya and watermelon plants. The flowers which contain both the sex
organs i.e. both the stamen and the carpel are called bisexual flowers like Hibiscus and
Mustard plant.
(b) The transfer of pollen grains from the anther of a stamen to the stigma of a carpel is called
pollination. It takes place when pollen grains are carried from the anther to the stigma of the
flower. (c) When a pollen grain falls on the stigma of the carpel, it bursts open and grows into a
pollen tube downwards through the style towards the female gamete in the ovary. A male
gamete moves down the pollen tube and enters the ovule in the ovary. The tip of the pollen
tube bursts open and male gamete comes out of the pollen tube which combines with the
nucleus of the female gamete present in the ovule to form a fertilised egg called zygote.

(d) The fertilised egg divides several times to form an embryo within the ovule which develops
a tough coat around it and is gradually converted into a seed. The ovary of the flower develops
and becomes a fruit with seeds inside it.

Question 55:
(a) Draw a neat diagram of a flower showing its various parts. In this diagram mark stem,
receptacle, sepals,
petals, stamen and carpel.
(b) What name is given to (i) all the petals of a flower, and (ii) all the sepals of a flower ?
(c) What are (i) stamen, and (ii) carpel, in a flower?
(d) What is the other name of carpel of a flower ?



(e) What is the name of yellow powdery substance present in the anther of a flower ?
Solution :
(a)

(b)
(i) Corolla
(ii) Calyx.
(c)
(i) Stamen is the male reproductive organ of the plant.
(ii) Carpel is the female reproductive organ of the plant.
(d) Pistil.
(e) Pollen grains.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:171

Question 56:
(a) What changes are seen in boys at the time of puberty ?
(b) Name the organs which produce sperms in human males.
(c) Draw a labelled diagram of the human male reproductive system. With the help of this
diagram, describe the working of human male reproductive system ?
(d) What is the role of seminal vesicles and prostrate gland in human male reproductive
system ?
Solution :
(a) The changes observed in boys during puberty are: Hair grows under armpits, pubic region
between the thighs, chest and face. Body becomes more muscular due to the development of
muscles. The voice deepens. Chest and shoulder broaden. The penis and testes become
larger. Feelings and sexual drives associated with adulthood begin to develop.
(b) Testes.
(c) Working of human male reproductive system: The human male reproductive system
consists of:
(i) Testes – Are the primary reproductive organs in males which are in pair. These are oval
shaped organs which lie outside the abdominal cavity. It makes the male sex cells called
sperms and produces male sex hormones called testosterone.
(ii) Scrotum – Is a muscular pouch which houses the testes. It is present outside the
abdominal cavity and maintains a lower temperature than the normal body temperature.
(iii) Epididymis – The sperms formed in the testes goes into a coiled tube called epididymis
which stores the sperms temporarily.
(iv) Vas Deferens (sperm duct) – It is a long tube which carries the sperms from epididymis to
another tube called urethra.



(v) Seminal vesicles and prostrate gland – Both these glands are present along the path of vas
deferens and add their secretions to sperms which allows them to transport easily.
(vi) Penis – It is an organ which pass?s the sperms from the man’s body into the vagina in the
women’s body during mating.
(d) The secretions of seminal vesicles and prostrate gland provide nutrition to the sperms and
also make their transportation easier by secreting a thick liquid.

Question 57:
(a) What changes are seen in girls at the time of puberty ?
(b) Name the organs which produce ova (or egg cells) in human females.
(c) Draw a labelled diagram of the human female reproductive system. With the help of this
diagram, explain the working of human female reproductive system.
(d) Describe the process of fertilisation in humans and development of embryo briefly.
Solution :
(a) The changes observed in girls during puberty are: Hair grows under armpits and pubic
region. Mammary glands develop and breasts become enlarged. The hips broaden and extra
fat is deposited in various parts of the body like hips and thighs. Fallopian tubes, uterus and
vagina enlarge. Ovaries start to release eggs and menstruation starts. Feelings and sexual
drives associated with adulthood begin to develop.
(b) Ovaries.
(c) Working of human female reproductive system: The human female reproductive system
consists of:
(i) Ovaries – These are the primary reproductive organs in women. They are oval shaped
organs which are inside the abdominal cavity of a woman near the kidneys and produces
mature female sex cells called ova or eggs. They also produce female sex hormones called
Oestrogen and Progesterone. Each ovary is composed of several thousand follicles which
mature to form ripe eggs at puberty.
(b) Oviduct – These are paired tubes which have funnel shaped openings that cover the
ovaries. The ovum released by an ovary goes into the oviduct through its funnel shaped
opening. The fertilisation of egg by a sperm takes place in it. It is also known as fallopian tube.
(c) Uterus – It is a bag like organ in which the fertilised egg develops into a baby. It is
connected through a narrow opening called cervix to another tube called vagina. It is
commonly called womb.
(d) Vagina – It is a tubular structure. It receives the penis for putting sperms into the women’s
body. It is also called birth canal because it is the passage through which the baby is born.



Question 58:
(a) What is ovulation ? How often does it happen in human females ?
(b) Where does fertilisation take place in human females ?
(c) Explain why, fertilisation is possible if mating takes place during the middle of menstrual
cycle.
(d) What is meant by implantation ?
(e) What is placenta ? What is its function ?
(f) What joins embryo to placenta in mother’s body ?
Solution :
(a) The release of an ovum from an ovary is called ovulation. In human females, the ovaries
start releasing ovum once every 28 days from the age of puberty.
(b) Oviducts.
(c) Fertilisation is possible if mating takes place during the middle of menstrual cycle because
in a normal healthy girl the ovulation takes place on the 14th day of the beginning of menstrual
cycle of 28 days.
(d) The embedding of embryo in the thick lining of the uterus is called implantation.
(e) Placenta – Placenta is a disc like special tissue which develops between the uterus wall
and the embryo after implantation. Its function is the exchange of nutrients, oxygen and waste
products between the embryo and the mother.
(f) Umbilical cord.
You can watch video lessons on YouTube:



 Metals And Non-metals

Question 1:
Name one metal and one non-metal which exist in liquid state at room temperature.
Solution :
Metal – Mercury.
Non metal – Bromine.

Question 2:
Why are metals called electropositive elements whereas non-metals are called electronegative
elements ?
Solution :
Metals are electropositive elements because they can form positive ions by losing electrons.
Non-metals are electronegative elements because they can form negative ions by gaining
electrons.

Question 3:
(a) Name the most abundant metal in the earth’s crust.
(b) Name the most abundant non-metal in the earth’s crust.
Solution :
(a) Aluminium.
(b) Oxygen.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:132

Question 4:
Name one metal which has a low melting point.
Solution :
Cesium.

Question 5:
Name the metal which is the poorest conductor of heat.

Solution :
Lead.

Question 6:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Non-metals react with dilute acids to produce a gas which burns with a ‘pop’ sound.
Solution :
False.



Question 7:
From amongst the metals sodium, calcium, aluminium, copper and magnesium, name the
metal :
(i) which reacts with water only on boiling, and
(ii) another which does not react even with steam.
Solution :
(i) Aluminium.
(ii) Copper.

Question 8:
What changes in the colour of iron nails and copper sulphate solution do you observe after
keeping the iron nails dipped in copper sulphate solution for about 30 minutes ?
Solution :
Iron nail gets covered with a red-brown coating of copper metal; The blue colour of copper
sulphate solution fades gradually.

Question 9:
What is aqua-regia ? Name two special metals which are insoluble in common reagents but
dissolve in aqua-regia.
Solution :
Aqua-regia is a freshly prepared mixture of one part of concentrated nitric acid and 3 parts of
concentrated hydrochloric acid. Gold and platinum dissolve in aqua-regia

Question 10:
Give the names and formulae of (a) two acidic oxides, and (b) two basic oxides.
Solution :
(a) Carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide.
(b) Sodium oxide and magnesium oxide.

Question 11:
What name is given to those metal oxides which show basic as well as acidic behaviour ?
Solution :
Amphoteric oxides.

Question 12:
Name two metals which form amphoteric oxides.
Solution :
Aluminium and zinc.

Question 13:
A copper coin is kept immersed in a solution of silver nitrate for some time. What will happen
to the coin and the colour of the solution ?
Solution :



Copper coin will get a shining greyish white coating of silver metal. The color of the solution
will turn blue.

Question 14:
Which property of copper and aluminium makes them suitable :
(a) for making cooking utensils and boilers ?
(b) for making electric wires ?
Solution :
(a) High thermal conductivity.
(b) High electrical conductivity.

Question 15:
Write the names and formulae of (a) a metal hydride, and (b) a non-metal hydride.
Solution :
Sodium hydride,Hydrogen sulphide

Question 16:
Name the metal which has been placed :
(a) at the bottom of the reactivity series
(b) at the top of the reactivity series
(c) just below copper in the reactivity series
Solution :
(a) Gold.
(b) Potassium.
(c) Mercury.

Question 17:
Which of the two metals is more reactive : copper or silver ?
Solution :
Copper.

Question 18:
(a) Name one metal which is stored in kerosene oil.
(b) Name one non-metal which is stored under water.
Solution :
(a) Sodium.
(b) White phosphorus.

Question 19:
Write equation for the reaction of :
(a) sodium with oxygen
(b) magnesium with oxygen
Solution :



Question 20:
Name two metals which are used :
(a) for making electric wires.
(b) for making domestic utensils and factory equipment.
(c) for making jewellery and to decorate sweets.
Solution :
(a) Aluminium and copper.
(b) Copper and aluminium.
(c) Gold and silver.

Question 21:
Which metal foil is used for packing some of the medicine tablets ?
Solution :
Aluminium foil.

Question 22:
Name the non-metal which is used :
(a) to convert vegetable oil into vegetable ghee(solid fat).
(b) as a rocket fuel (in liquid form).
(c) to make electrodes of dry cells.
(d) to preserve food materials.
(e) in the vulcanisation of rubber.
Solution :
(a) Hydrogen.
(b) Hydrogen.
(c) Carbon.
(d) Nitrogen.
(e) Sulphur.

Question 23:
Name one property which is characteristic of (a) metals, and (b) non-metals.
Solution :
(a) Metals are malleable.
(b) Non-metals are non-malleable.

Question 24:
What is meant by “brittleness” ? Which type of elements usually show brittleness : metals or
non-metals ?
Solution :
Brittleness is the property of being brittle i.e. breaking easily.
Non-metals show brittleness.

Question 25:
What will happen if a strip of zinc is immersed in a solution of copper sulphate ?
Solution :
When a strip of zinc metal is put in copper sulphate solution, then the blue colour of copper
sulphate solution fades gradually and red brown coating of copper is deposited on zinc strip.

Question 26:
What will happen if a strip of copper is kept immersed in a solution of silver nitrate (AgN03) ?
Solution :
When a strip of copper metal is immersed in silver nitrate solution, the solution gradually



becomes blue and a shining greyish-white deposit of silver metal is formed on copper strip.

Question 27:
What happens when iron nails are put into copper sulphate solution ?
Solution :
When iron nails are placed in copper sulphate solution, the blue colour of copper sulphate
solution fades gradually and red-brown copper metal is formed.

Question 28:
How would you show that silver is chemically less reactive than copper ?
Solution :
If a strip of silver metal is kept immersed in copper sulphate solution for some time, then no
reaction occurs. This shows that silver is not able to displace copper from copper sulphate
solution.

Question 29:
Give reasons for the following :
Blue colour of copper sulphate solution is destroyed when iron filings are added to it.
Solution :
Blue color of copper sulphate is destroyed because iron displaces copper from copper
sulphate solution as iron is more reactive than copper.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:133

Question 30:
Name a non-metal having a very high melting point.
Solution :
Diamond.

Question 31:
Which property of graphite is utilised in making electrodes ?
Solution :
Since graphite is a good conductor of electricity, it is used in making electrodes.

Question 32:
Name two non-metals which are both brittle and non-ductile.
Solution :
Sulphur and phosphorus.

Question 33:
Explain why, the surface of some metals acquires a dull appearance when exposed to air for a
long time.
Solution :
The surface of some metals acquires a dull appearance when exposed to air for a long time
because metals form a thin layer of oxides, carbonates or sulphide on their surface by the
slow action of various gases present in air.

Question 34:
Complete and balance the following equations :



Solution :

Question 35:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Magnesium liberates………………… gas on reacting with hot boiling water.
(b) The white powder formed when magnesium ribbon burns in oxygen is of………………………………..
(c) Ordinary aluminium strips are not attacked by water because of the presence of a layer
of………………………………… on the surface of aluminium.
(d) A metal having low melting point is……………………. but a non-metal having very high melting
point is………………………
(e) Calcium is a…………….. reactive metal than sodium.
Solution :
(a)Hydrogen.
(b) Magnesium oxide.
(c) Aluminium oxide.
(d) Sodium; Diamond.
(e) Less.

Question 36:
(a) What is meant by saying that the metals are malleable and ductile ? Explain with examples.
(b) Name two metals which are both malleable and ductile.
(c) Which property of iron metal is utilised in producing iron sheets required for making
buckets ?
(d) Which property of copper metal is utilised in making thin wires ?
Solution :
(a) Metals are malleable i.e. they can be beaten into thin sheets with a hammer.
Example: Aluminium.
Metals are ductile i.e. they can be drawn into thin wires.
Example: Copper.
(b) Aluminium and copper.
(c) Malleability.
(d) Ductility.

Question 37:
Name two metals which react violently with cold water. Write any three observations you
would make when such a metal is dropped into water. How would you identify the gas evolved,
if any, during the reaction ?
Solution :
Sodium and potassium metals react violently with cold water.
Observations:
1. Metal starts moving over the surface of water making a hissing sound.
2. Metal starts reacting with water causing little explosions.
3. Soon the metal catches fire and starts burning.

Question 38:
(a) With the help of examples, describe how metal oxides differ from non-metal oxides.
(b) Which of the following elements would yield : (i) an acidic oxide, (ii) a basic oxide, and (iii) a



neutral oxide ?
Na, S, C, K, H
Solution :
(a)M etal oxides are basic in nature and turn red litmus blue. For example: Magnesium oxide.
Non-metal oxides are acidic or neutral in nature. The acidic oxides turn blue litmus red. For
example: Carbon dioxide.
(b) (i) Acidic oxide: S, C
(ii) Basic oxide: Na, K
(iii) Neutral oxide: H

Question 39:
(a) What are amphoteric oxides ? Give two examples of amphoteric oxides.
(b) Choose the acidic oxides, basic oxides and neutral oxides from the following :
Na2O ; CO2 ; CO ; SO2; MgO ; N2O ; H2O.
(c) Which of the following are amphoteric oxides :
MgO, ZnO, P2O3, Al2O3, NO2
Solution :
(a) Those metal oxides which show basic as well as acidic behavior are known as amphoteric
oxides.
Example: Aluminium oxide and zinc oxide.
(b) Acidic oxide – CO 2 , CO, SO 2 and N 2 O; Basic oxide – Na 2 O, MgO; Neutral oxide – H 2 O.
(c) ZnO, Al 2 O 3 .

Question 40:
(a) What is the nature of the oxide SO2 ? What happens when it is dissolved in water ? Write
the chemical equation of the reaction involved.
(b) What is the nature of the oxide Na2O ? What happens when it is dissolved in water ? Write
the chemical equation of the reaction inolved.
Solution :
(a) SO2 is acidic in nature. When dissolved in water, it produces sulphurous acid.

(b) Na2O is basic in nature. When dissolved in water, it forms an alkali called sodium
hydroxide.

Question 41:
(a) What type of oxides are formed when non-metals react with oxygen ? Explain with an
example.
(b) What type of oxides are formed when metals combine with oxygen ? Explain with the help
of an example.
Solution :
(a) When non-metals react with oxygen, they form acidic oxides or neutral oxides.
Example: Carbon reacts with oxygen to form an acidic oxide called carbon dioxide. Hydrogen
reacts with oxygen
(b)When metals combine with oxygen, they form basic oxides.
Example: Sodium reacts with oxygen to form a basic oxide called sodium oxide.

Question 42:



(a) Explain why, metals usually do not liberate hydrogen gas with dilute nitric acid.
(b) Name two metals which can, however, liberate hydrogen gas from very dilute nitric acid.
Solution :
Metals do not liberate hydrogen gas with nitric acid because nitric acid is a strong oxidizing
agent. So, as soon as hydrogen gas is formed in the reaction between a metal and dilute nitric
acid, the nitric acid oxidises
this hydrogen to water.
(b) Magnesium and manganese.

Question 43:
(a) How do metals react with hydrogen ? Explain with an example.
(b) How do non-metals react with hydrogen ? Explain with an example.
Solution :
(a) Most of the metals do not react with hydrogen. Only a few reactive metals react with
hydrogen to form metal hydrides. For example: When hydrogen gas is passed over heated
sodium, then sodium hydride is formed.
(b) Non-metals react with hydrogen to form covalent hydrides. For example: Sulphur combines
with hydrogen to form hydrogen sulphide.

Question 44:
(a) What happens when calcium reacts with chlorine ? Write an equation for the reaction
which takes place.
(b) What happens when magnesium reacts with very dilute nitric acid ? Write an equation for
the reaction involved.
Solution :
(a)Calcium reacts vigorously with chlorine to form an ionic chloride called calcium chloride.

(b)Magnesium reacts with very dilute nitric acid to form magnesium nitrate and hydrogen gas.

Question 45:
(a) Arrange the following metals in order of their chemical reactivity, placing the most reactive
metal first :
Magnesium, Copper, Iron, Sodium, Zinc, Lead, Calcium.
(b) What happens when a rod of zinc metal is dipped into a solution of copper sulphate ? Give
chemical equation of the reaction involved.
Solution :
(a) Sodium > Calcium > Magnesium > Zinc > Iron > Lead > Copper
(b) When a strip of zinc metal is put in copper sulphate solution, then the blue colour of copper
sulphate solution fades gradually and red brown coating of copper is deposited on the zinc
strip.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:134

Question 46:
A copper plate was dipped in AgNO3 After certain time, silver from the solution was deposited
on the copper plate. State the reason why it happened. Give the chemical equation of the
reaction involved.



Solution :
Silver gets deposited on the copper plate because copper is more reactive than silver and
hence displaces silver from silver nitrate solution.

Question 47:
State five uses of metals and five of non-metals.
Solution :
Uses of metals:
(i) Lead metal is used in making car batteries.
(ii) Zinc is used for galvanizing iron to protect it from rusting.
(iii) Iron, copper and aluminium are used to make utensils.
(iv) Copper and aluminium metals are used to make electrical wires.
(v) Aluminium is used to make aluminium foil for packaging materials.
Uses of non-metals:
(i) Hydrogen is used in the hydrogenation of vegetable oils.
(ii) Carbon is used to make electrodes of electrolytic cells and dry cells.
(iii) Nitrogen is used in the manufacture of ammonia, nitric acid and fertilizers.
(iv) Sulphur is used for producing sulphuric acid.
(v) Liquid hydrogen is used as rocket fuel.

Question 48:
State one use each of the following metals :
Copper, Aluminium, Iron, Silver, Gold, Mercury
Solution :
(i) Copper – Copper is used to make wires to carry electric current.
(ii) Aluminium – Aluminium foils are used in packaging of food materials.
(iii) Iron – Iron is used to make utensils.
(iv) Silver – Silver is used to make jewellery.
(v) Gold – Gold is used to make jewellery.
(vi) Mercury – Mercury is used in thermometers.

Question 49:
(a) State one use each of the following non-metals :
Hydrogen, Carbon (as Graphite), Nitrogen, Sulphur
(b) Name the metal which is used in making thermometers.
Solution :
(a) (i) Hydrogen – Hydrogen is used in the hydrogenation of vegetable oils.
(ii) Carbon is used to make electrodes of electrolytic cells and dry cells.
(iii) Nitrogen is used in the manufacture of ammonia, nitric acid and fertilizers.
(iv) Sulphur is used in making sulphuric acid.
(b) Mercury

Question 50:
(a) Why does aluminium not react with water under ordinary conditions ?
(b) Name two metals which can displace hydrogen from dilute acids.
(c) Name two metals which cannot displace hydrogen from dilute acids.
Solution :
(a) Aluminium metal does not react with water under ordinary conditions because of the
presence of a thin layer of aluminium oxide on its surface.
(b) Sodium and magnesium.
(c) Copper and silver.



Question 51:
(a) Why is sodium kept immersed in kerosene oil ?
(b) Why is white phosphorus kept immersed under water ?
(c) Can we keep sodium immersed under water ? Why ?
Solution :
(a) Sodium is a very reactive metal so it reacts vigorously with the oxygen of air and catches
fire. It is kept immersed in kerosene oil to protect it from the action of oxygen, moisture and
carbon dioxide of air and to prevent accidental fires.
(b) White phosphorus is kept immersed in water because it reacts spontaneously with oxygen
of air to form phosphorus pentoxide but does not react with water.
(c) No, because sodium reacts vigorously with water to form sodium hydroxide and hydrogen.

Question 52:
(a) Describe the reaction of potassium with water. Write the equation of the reaction involved.
(b) Write an equation of the reaction of iron with steam. Indicate the physical states of all the
reactants and products.
(c) Which gas is produced when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to a reactive metal ?
Solution :
(a) Potassium reacts violently with cold water to form potassium hydroxide and hydrogen gas.

(c) Hydrogen.

Question 53:
(a) Give one example, with equation, of the displacement of hydrogen by a metal from an acid.
(b) Name two metals (other than zinc and iron) which can displace hydrogen from dilute
hydrochloric acid ?
Solution :
(a) Magnesium reacts with very dilute nitric acid to form magnesium nitrate and hydrogen gas.

(b) Magnesium and aluminium.

Question 54:
What is the action of water on (a) sodium (b) magnesium, and (c) aluminium ? Write equations
of the chemical reactions involved.
Solution :
(a) Sodium reacts vigorously with cold water forming sodium hydroxide and hydrogen gas.

Question 55:
You are given samples of three metals — sodium, magnesium and copper. Suggest any two
activities to arrange them in order of their decreasing reactivities.
Solution :
(i) When sodium, magnesium and copper are left in air, sodium reacts vigorously with oxygen
to form sodium oxide, magnesium reacts with oxygen to form magnesium oxide only on
heating , whereas copper does not burn in air even on strong heating. It reacts only on



prolonged heating. This shows that sodium is most reactive, then magnesium and copper is
the least reactive among the three.
(ii) Sodium reacts vigorously with cold water to form sodium hydroxide and hydrogen,
magnesium does not react with cold water but reacts with hot water to form magnesium
hydroxide and hydrogen but copper does not react even with steam. This shows that sodium
is highly reactive; magnesium is less reactive than sodium and copper is the least reactive
among the three.

Question 56:
(a) Write one reaction in which aluminium oxide behaves as a basic oxide and another in which
it behaves as an acidic oxide.
(b) What special name is given to substances like aluminium oxide.
(c) Name another metal oxide which behaves like aluminium oxide.
Solution :

Question 57:
(a) What happens when calcium reacts with water ? Write the chemical equation of the
reaction of calcium with water.
(b) Write the chemical equation of the reaction which takes place when iron reacts with dilute
sulphuric acid. What happens when the gas produced is ignited with a burning matchstick ?
Solution :

When hydrogen gas is ignited with a burning matchstick, it produces a ‘pop’sound.

Question 58:
You are given a dry cell, a torch bulb with holder, wires and crocodile clips. How would you use
them to distinguish between samples of metals and non-metals ?
Solution :
We would create an apparatus using dry cell, a torch bulb fitted in a holder and some
connecting wires with crocodile clips and connect them to make an electric circuit. Then insert
a piece of sulphur between the crocodile clips and the bulb does not light up at all. This means
that sulphur does not allow the electric current to pass through it. Now insert a piece of copper
between the crocodile clips and the bulb will light up. This observation shows that non metals
(ex- sulphur) do not conduct electricity and metals (ex- copper) conduct electricity.

Question 59:
State any five physical properties of metals and five physical properties of non-metals.
Solution :
Properties of metals:
(i) Metals are malleable i.e. they can be beaten into thin sheets with a hammer.
(ii) Metals are ductile i.e. they can be drawn into thin wires.
(iii) Metals are good conductors of heat and electricity.
(iv) Metals are lustrous.



(v) Metals are generally hard.
Properties of non-metals:
(i) Non-metals are non-malleable i.e. they cannot be beaten into thin sheets with a hammer.
(ii) Non-metals are non-ductile i.e. they cannot be drawn into thin wires.
(iii) Non-m etals are bad conductors of heat and electricity.
(iv) Non-m etals are non- lustrous.
(v) Non-m etals are generally soft .

Question 60:
(a) Name two physical properties each of sodium and carbon in which their behaviour is not
as expected from their classification as metal and non-metal respectively.
(b) Name two metals whose melting points are so low that they melt when held in the hand.
Solution :
(a) Sodium metal: Soft, low melting point
Carbon non-metal: graphite conducts electricity; diamond has a very high melting point.
(b) Gallium and cesium.

Question 61:
Metals are said to be shiny. Why do metals generally appear to be dull ? How can their
brightness be restored ?
Solution :
Metals lose their shine or brightness on keeping in air for a long time and acquire a dull
appearence due to the formation of a thin layer of oxide, carbonate or sulphide on their surface
by the slow action of various gases present in air.
Brightness of metals can be restored by rubbing the dull surface of the metal object with a
sand paper, then the outer corroded layer is removed and the metal object becomes shiny and
bright once again.

Question 62:
(a) What are metals ? Name five metals.
(b) Name a metal which is so soft that it can be cut with a knife.
(c) Name the metal which is the best conductor of heat and electricity.
(d) What happens when a metal reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid ? Explain with the help of
an example.
(e) Write the equations for the reactions of :
(i) Magnesium with dilute hydrochloric acid
(ii) Aluminium with dilute hydrochloric acid
(iii) Zinc with dilute hydrochloric acid
(iv) Iron with dilute hydrochloric acid
Name the products formed in each case. Also indicate the physical states of all the
substances involved.
Solution :
(a) Metals are the elements that conduct heat and electricity, and are malleable and ductile.
Example: Iron, aluminium, copper, gold and silver.
(b) Sodium
(c) Silver
(d) When a metal reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid, it forms metal chloride and hydrogen
gas.
Example: Magnesium reacts rapidly with dilute hydrochloric acid to form magnesium chloride
and hydrogen.



Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:135

Question 63:
(a) Define non-metals. Give five examples of non-metals.
(b) Name a non-metal which conducts electricity.
(c) Name a non-metal having lustre (shining surface).
(d) Name a non-metal which is extremely hard.
(e) How do non-metals react with oxygen ? Explain with an example. Give equation of the
reaction involved. What is the nature of the product formed ? How will you demonstrate it ?
Solution :
(a)Non-metals are the elements that do not conduct heat and electricity and are neither
malleable nor ductile.
Example: Carbon, sulphur, phosphorus, silicon and oxygen.
(b) Carbon.
(c) Iodine.
(d) Carbon (Diamond).
(e) Non-metals react with oxygen to form acidic oxides or neutral oxides. Carbon burns in air to
form carbon dioxide.

The nature of the product formed is acidic. When carbon dioxide dissolves in water, it forms
carbonic acid. It turns blue litmus to red which shows it is acidic in nature.

Question 64:
(a) What is meant by the reactivity series of metals ? Arrange the following metals in an
increasing order of their reactivities towards water :
Zinc, Iron, Magnesium, Sodium
(b) Hydrogen is not a metal but still it has been assigned a place in the reactivity series of
metals. Why ?
(c) Name one metal more reactive and another less reactive than hydrogen.
(d) Name one metal which displaces copper from copper sulphate solution and one which
does not.
(e) Name one metal which displaces silver from silver nitrate solution and one which does not.
Solution :
(a) The arrangement of metals in a vertical column in the order of decreasing reactivities is
called reactivity series.
Increasing order of reactivity: Iron < zinc < magnesium < sodium
(b) Though hydrogen is not a metal but it has been placed in the reactivity series of metals due
to the fact that like metals, hydrogen also loses electrons and forms positive ions.
(c) Lead is more reactive than hydrogen and copper is less reactive than hydrogen.
(d) Zinc displaces copper from copper sulphate solution and mercury does not displace
copper from copper sulphate solution.



(e) Copper displaces silver from silver nitrate solution and gold does not.

Question 65:
(a) State any three differences between the physical properties of metals and non-metals.
(b) Differentiate between metals and non-metals on the basis of their chemical properties.
(c) State three reasons (of which at least one must be chemical) for believing that sodium is a
metal.
(d) State three reasons (of which at least one must be chemical) for believing that sulphur is a
non-metal.
(e) Which non-metal has been placed in the reactivity series of metals ?
Solution :
(a) Difference between metals and non-metals:
Metals
(i) Metals are malleable i.e. they can be beaten into thin sheets with a hammer.
(ii) Metals are ductile i.e. they can be drawn into thin wires.
(iii) Metals are good conductors of heat and electricity.
Non-metals
(i) Non-metals are non-malleable i.e. they cannot be beaten into thin sheets with a hammer.
(ii) Non-metals are non-ductile i.e. they cannot be drawn into thin wires.
(iii) Non-metals are bad conductors of heat and electricity.
(b) Difference between metals and non-metals:
Metals
(i) Metals form basic oxides.
(ii) Metals displace hydrogen from water
(iii) Metals displace hydrogen from dilute acids.
Non-metals
(i) Non-metals form acidic or neutral oxides.
(ii) Non-metals do not react with water.
(iii) Non-metals do not react with dilute acids.
(c) Sodium is a solid, it conducts electricity and forms basic oxides.
(d) Sulphur is a non-metal as it is brittle, non-ductile, non-conductor of electricity and forms
acidic oxides.
(e) Hydrogen.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:136

Question 89:
An element E forms an oxide E2 An aqueous solution of E2O turns red litmus paper blue.
(a) What is the nature of the oxide E2O ?
(b) State whether element E is a metal or a non-metal.
(a) Give one example of an element like E.
Solution :
(a) Basic oxide.
(b) Metal .
(c) Sodium, Na .

Question 90:
Metal A burns in air, on heating, to form an oxide A2O3 whereas another metal B burns in air
only on strong heating to form an oxide BO. The two oxides A2O3 and BO can react with
hydrochloric acid as well as sodium hydroxide solution to form the corresponding salts and
water.
(a) What is the nature of oxide A2O3 ?



(b) What is the nature of oxide BO ?
(c) Name one metal like A.
(d) Name one metal like B.
Solution :
(a) Amphoteric oxide .
(b) Amphoteric oxide .
(c) Aluminium, Al.
(d) Zinc, Zn .

Question 91:
An element X forms two oxides XO and XO2. The oxide XO has no action on litmus solution
but oxide X02 turns litmus solution red.
(a) What is the nature of oxide XO ?
(b) What is the nature of oxide XO2 ?
(c) Would you call element X a metal or a non-metal ? Give reason for your choice.
(d) Can you give an example of element like X ?
Solution :
(a) Neutral oxide.
(b) Acidic o xide .
(c) X is non-metal because non-metals form acidic and basic oxide .
(d) Carbon, C .

Question 92:
State and explain the reactions, if any, of the following metals with a solution of copper
sulphate :
(a) Gold (b) Copper (c) Zinc (d) Mercury
Solution :
(a) No displacement reaction will take place because go ld is less reactive than copper.
(b) No reaction will take place between copper and copper sulphate solution ; there is no
reaction possible.
(c) Zinc displaces copper from copper sulphate solution to form zinc sulphate solution and
copper metal because zinc is m ore reactive than copper .
(d) No displacement reaction will take place because mercury is less reactive than copper

Question 93:
(a) Give the names and formulae of one metal chloride and one non-metal chloride.
(b) State an important property in which these metal chloride and non-metal chloride differ.
(c) Why do they differ in this property ?
Solution :
Non-metal chloride:
Carbon tetrachloride, CCl 4
(b) Sodium chloride solution conducts electricity whereas carbon tetrachlori de does not
conduct electricity.
(c) Sodium chloride is an ionic compoun d whereas carbon tetrachloride is a covalent
compound.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:137

Question 94:
In a solution of lead acetate, a strip of metal M was dipped. After some time, lead from the
solution was deposited on the metal strip. Which metal is more reactive, M or lead ?
Solution :



M is more reactive than lead since it is able to displace lead from lead acetate solution

Question 95:

On the basis of the above reactions, indicate which is most reactive and which is least reactive
metal out of zinc, copper and iron.
Solution :
Zinc is most r eactive and copper is least reactive out of the three since iron displaced copper
from its solution and zinc displaced iron from its solution.

Question 96:
Which of the following reactions will not occur ? Why not ?

Solution :
Reaction (a) will not occur because Cu is less reactive than Mg
Reaction (c) will also not occur because Fe is less reactive than Mg .

Question 97:
In nature, metal A is found in a free state while metal B is found in the form of its compounds.
Which of these two will be nearer to the top of the activity series of metals ?
Solution :
Metal B will be nearer to the top of the activity series since it is highly reactive and is hence
found in the form of its compounds and not in free state.

Question 98:
If A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J and K represent metals in the decreasing order of their reactivity,
which one of them is most likely to occur in a free state in nature ?
Solution :
K being the lowest in the reactivity series is least reactive and is most likely to occur in a free
state in nature.

Question 99:
(a) Name a metal for each case :
(i) It does not react with cold as well as hot water but reacts with steam.
(ii) It does not react with any physical state of water.
(b) When calcium metal is added to water, the gas evolved does not catch fire but the same
gas evolved on adding sodium metal to water catches fire. Why is it so ?
Solution :
(a) (i) Iron (ii) Gold
(b) More heat is evolved during the reaction of sodium metal with water due to which the hyd
rogen gas formed catches fire. O n the other hand, less heat is evolved during the reaction of
calcium metal with water which cannot make the hydrogen gas bu rn .

Question 100:
A zinc plate was kept in a glass container having CuS04 On examining it was found that the
blue colour of the solution is getting lighter and lighter. After a few days, when the zinc plate
was taken out of the solution, a number of small holes were noticed in it. State the reason and



give chemical equation of the reaction involved.
Solution :
Zinc metal is more reactive than copper. Some of the zinc metal of zinc plate dissolves and
displaces copper from copper sulphate solution. This dissolving of zinc metal forms tiny holes
in zinc plate. Blue colour of copper sulphate solution gets lighter and lighter due to the
formation of colourless zinc sulphate solution.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:167

Question 1:
What is the name of the chemical bond formed :
(a) by the sharing of electrons between two atoms ?
(b) by the transfer of electrons from one atom to another ?
Solution :
(a) Covalent bond.
(b) Ionic bond .

Question 2:
Name a carbon containing molecule which has two double bonds.
Solution :
Carbon dioxide

Question 3:
What would be the electron-dot structure of carbon dioxide which has the formula C02 ?
Solution :

Question 4:
What type of chemical bond is formed between :
(a) potassium and bromine ?
(b) carbon and bromine ?
Solution :
(a) Ionic bond.
(b) Covalent bo nd.

Question 5:
(a) What do we call those particles which have more or less electrons than the normal atoms ?
(b) What do we call those particles which have more electrons than the normal atoms ?
(c) What do we call those particles which have less electrons than the normal atoms ?
Solution :
(a) Ions
(b) Anions
(c) Cations

Question 6:
(a) The atomic number of sodium is 11. What is the number of electrons in Na+ ?
(b) The atomic number of chlorine is 17. What is the number of electrons in Cl– ?
Solution :
(a) No. of electrons in Na+ = 10
(b) No. of electrons in Cl– = 18



Question 7:
The atomic number of an element X is 8 and that of element Y is 12. Write down the symbols
of the ions you would expect to be formed from their atoms.
Solution :
X will form X 2-
Y will form Y 2+

Question 8:
(a) Write down the electronic configuration of (i) magnesium atom, and (ii)magnesium ion. (At.
No. of Mg = 12)
(b) Write down the electronic configuration of (i) sulphur atom, and (ii) sulphide ion. (At. No. of
S = 16)
Solution :
(a) (i) E.C of Mg = 2, 8, 2 (ii) E.C of Mg2+ = 2, 8
(b) (i) E.C of S = 2, 8, 6 (ii) E.C of S2- = 2, 8, 8

Question 9:
What type of chemical bonds are present in a solid compound which has a high melting point,
does not conduct electricity in the solid state but becomes a good conductor in the molten
state ?
Solution :
Ionic bonds .

Question 10:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
The aqueous solution of an ionic compound conducts electricity because there are plenty of
free electrons in the solution.
Solution :
False (It should be ‘ions’ in place of ‘electrons’) .

Question 11:
What type of bonds are present in hydrogen chloride and oxygen ?
Solution :
Covalent bond

Question 12:
Write the electron-dot structures for the following molecules :
(i) NaCl (ii) Cl2
Solution :

Question 13:
What type of bonds are present in water molecule ? Draw the electron-dot structure of water
(H20).
Solution :
Covalent bonds are present in a water molecule. Electron dot structure of water:



Question 14:
What type of bonds are present in methane (CH4) and sodium chloride (NaCl) ?
Solution :
Methane: Covalent bonds
Sodium chloride: Ionic bonds

Question 15:
State one major difference between covalent and ionic bonds and give one example each of
covalent and ionic compounds.
Solution :
Ionic compounds conduct electricity when dissolved in water or melted whereas covalent
compounds do not conduct electricity.
Ionic compound – NaCl
Covalent compound – Carbon Dioxide

Question 16:
What type of bonds are present in the following molecules ? Draw their electron-dot structures.
(i) H2 (ii) CH4 (iii) Cl2 (iv) O2
Solution :
Covalent bonds are present in the given molecules

.

Question 17:
Which inert gas electron configuration do the Cl atoms in Cl2 molecule resemble ? What is this
electron configuration ?
Solution :
Argon; E.C = 2, 8,8

Question 18:
Which of the following compounds are ionic and which are covalent ?
Urea, Cane sugar, Hydrogen chloride, Sodium chloride, Ammonium chloride, Carbon
tetrachloride, Ammonia, Alcohol, Magnesium chloride.
Solution :
Ionic compounds: Sodium chloride, Ammoniu m chloride, Magnesium chloride.
Covalent compounds:



Urea, Cane sugar, Hy drogen chloride,
Carbon tetrachloride, Ammonia, Alcohol .

Question 19:
Give one example each of the following :
(i) Amolecule containing a single covalent bond
(ii) Amolecule containing a double covalent bond
(iii) Amolecule containing a triple covalent bond
(iv) Acompound containing an ionic bond
Solution :
(i) Hydrog en
(ii) Oxygen
(iii) Nitrogen
(iv) Sodium chloride

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:168

Question 20:
Fill in the blanks in the following sentences :
(i) Two atoms of the same element combine to form a molecule. The bond between them is
known as…………………………………bond.
(ii) Two chlorine atoms combine to form a molecule. The bond between them is known as
(iii) In forming oxygen molecule,………….. electrons are shared by each atom of oxygen.
(iv) In forming N2 molecule,……….. electrons are shared by each atom of nitrogen.
(v) The number of single covalent bonds in C2H2 molecule are…………………………
(vi) Melting points and boiling points of ionic compounds are generally………………… than those of
covalent compounds.
Solution :
(i) Covalent
(ii) Covalent
(iii) Two
(iv) Three
(v) Two
(vi) Higher

Question 21:
(a) What is a covalent bond ? What type of bond exists in (i) CCl4, and (ii) CaCl2 ?
(b) What is an ionic bond ? What type of bond is present in oxygen molecule ?
Solution :
(a) The chemical bond formed by the sharing of electrons between two atoms is known as a
covalent bond.
(i) Covalent bonds (ii) Ionic bonds
(b) The chemical bond formed by the transfer of electrons from one atom to another is known
as an ionic bond.
Covalent bond is present in an oxygen molecule.

Question 22:
(a) What is an ion ? Explain with examples.
(b) What is the nature of charge on (i) a cation, and (ii) an anion ?
(c) Name the cation and anion present in MgCl2. Also write their symbols.
Solution :
(a) An ion is an electrically charged atom (or group of atoms). Example: Sodium ion, Na + ,



magnesium ion, Mg 2+ .
(b) (i) Positive charge (ii) Negative charge
(c) Cation: Magnesium ion, Mg 2+
Anion: Chloride ions, 2Cl –

Question 23:
(a) What type of chemical bond is present in chlorine molecule ? Explain your answer.
(b) Explain the formation of a chlorine molecule on the basis of electronic theory of valency.
Solution :
(a) Covalent bond ; Because whenever two atoms of the same element combine to form a
molecule, a covalent bond is formed.
(b) The atomic number of chlorine is 17, so its electronic configuration is 2,8,7. Chlorine atom
has 7 electrons in its outermost shell and needs 1 more electron to complete its octet and
become stable.
It gets this electron by sharing with another chlorine atom. So, two chlorine atoms share one
electron each to form a chlorine molecule. Because the two chlorine atoms share electrons,
there is a strong force of attraction between them which holds them together. This force is
called covalent bond.
Now, each chlorine atom in the chlorine molecule has the electronic configuration 2,8,8
resembling its nearest inert gas argon. Since the chlorine atoms in a chlorine molecule have
inert gas electron arrangements, therefore, a chlorine molecule is more stable than two
separate chlorine atoms.

Question 24:
(a) Giving one example each, state what are (i) ionic compounds, and (ii) covalent compounds.
(b) Compare the properties of ionic compounds and covalent compounds.
Solution :
(a) (i) The compounds containing ionic bonds are known as ionic compounds. They are
formed by the transfer of electrons from one atom to another.
Example: Sodium chloride, NaCl.
(ii) The compounds containing covalent bonds are known as covalent compounds. They are
formed by the sharing of electrons between atoms. Example: Methane, CH 4 .
(b)
Ionic compounds
(i) Ionic compounds are usually crystalline solids.
(ii) Ionic compounds have high melting and boiling points.
(iii) Ionic compounds are usually soluble in water.
Covalent compounds
(i) Covalent compounds are usually liquids or gases.
(ii) Covalent compounds have low melting and boiling points.
(iii) Covalent compounds are usually insoluble in water.

Question 25:
Explain why :
(a) covalent compounds have generally low melting points.
(b) ionic compounds have generally high melting points.
Solution :
(a) Covalent compounds have generally low melting points because they are made up of
electrically neutral molecules. So, the force of attraction between the molecules of a covalent
compound is ve ry weak. Hence, only a small amount of heat energy is required to break these
weak molecular forces.
(b) Ionic compounds are made of up of positive and negative ions. There is a strong force of



attraction between the oppositely charged ions, so a lot of heat energy is required to break this
force of attraction and melt or boil the ionic compound. Due to this, ionic compounds have
high melting points.

Question 26:
(a) Give two general properties of ionic compounds and two those of covalent compounds.
(b) State one test by which sodium chloride can be distinguished from sugar.
Solution :
(a) Ionic compounds:
(i) They have high melting and boiling points.
(ii) They are usually soluble in water.
Covalent compounds:
(i) They have low melting and boiling points.
(ii) They are usually insoluble in water.
(b) An aqueous solution of sodium chloride conducts electricity but a sugar solution does not
conduct electri city.

Question 27:
(a) Explain why, ionic compounds conduct electricity in solution whereas covalent compounds
do not conduct electricity .
(b) Which of the following will conduct electricity and which not ?
MgCl2, CCl4, NaCl, CS2, Na2S Give reasons for your choice.
Solution :
(a) Ionic compounds conduct electricity in solution because they are made up of electrically
charged ions but covalent compounds are made u p of electrically neutral molecules so they
do not conduct electricity.
(b) Conduct electricity: MgCl 2 , NaCl, Na 2 S (Ionic compounds)
Do not con duct electricity: CCl 4 , CS 2 ( Covalent compounds) .

Question 28:
(a) Name one ionic compound containing chlorine and one covalent compound containing
chlorine.
(b) How will you find out which of the water soluble compound A or B is ionic ?
Solution :
(a) Ionic co mpound: Sodium chloride, NaCl.
Cova lent c ompound: Carbon tetrachloride, CCl 4
(b) Out of A and B, the compound whose aqueous solution cond ucts electricity will be an ionic
compound.

Question 29:
Explain why, a solution of cane sugar does not conduct electricity but a solution of common
salt is a good conductor of electricity.
Solution :
Common salt is an ionic compound containing ionic bonds whereas cane sugar is a covalent
compound containing covalent bonds. Since, ionic compounds conduct electricity and
covalent compounds do not, hence common salt is a good conductor of electricity and cane
sugar is a non-conductor of electricity.

Question 30:
Give the formulae of the compounds that would be formed by the combination of the following
pairs of elements :
(a) Mg and N2 (b) Li and O2



(c) Al and Cl2 (d) K and H
Solution :
(a) Mg 3 N 2
(b) Li 2 O
(c) AlCl 3
(d) KH

Question 31:
(a) What are noble gases ? What is the characteristic of the electronic configuration of noble
gases ?
(b) What is the cause of chemical bonding (or chemical combination) of atoms of elements ?
Solution :
(a) There are some elements in group 18 of the periodic table which do not combine with other
elements. These elements are helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon and radon . They are known
as noble gases or inert gases because they are unreactive.
If we look at the electronic configuration of noble gases, we would notice that except helium,
all other inert gases have 8 electrons (helium has 2) in their outermost shells. This is
considered to be the most stable arrangement of electrons.
(b) Atoms form chemical bonds to achieve stability by acquiring the inert gas electron
configuration.

Question 32:
(i) Write electron-dot structures for magnesium and oxygen.
(ii) Show the formation of MgO by the transfer of electrons.
(iii) What are the ions present in this compound ?
Solution :

Question 33:
Draw the electron-dot structure of a hydrogen chloride molecule :
(i) Which inert gas does the H atom in HCl resemble in electron arrangement ?
(ii) Which inert gas does the Cl atom in HCl resemble in electron arrangement ?
Solution :

(i) Helium
(ii) Argon



Question 34:
What type of bonding would you expect between the following pairs of elements ?
(i) Calcium and Oxygen
(ii) Carbon and Chlorine
(iii) Hydrogen and Chlorine
Solution :
(i) Ionic bonding.
(ii) Covalent bonding.
(iii) Covalent bonding.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:169

Question 35:
Describe how sodium and chlorine atoms are changed into ions when they react with each
other to form sodium chloride, NaCl. What is the name given to this type of bonding ? (At. No
of sodium = 11; At. No. of chlorine = 17)
Solution :
The atomic number of sodium is 11, so its electronic configuration is 2,8,1. Sodium atom has
only 1 electron in its outermost shell. So, the sodium atom donates one electron (to a chlorine
atom) and forms a sodium ion, Na + . The atomic number of chlorine is 17, so its electronic
configuration is 2,8,7. Chlorine atom has 7 electrons in its outermost shell and needs 1 more
electron to achieve the stable 8-electron inert gas configuration. So, a chlorine atom takes one
electron (from the sodium atom) and forms a negatively charged chloride ion, Cl- This type of
bonding is called ionic bonding.

Question 36:
What is the difference between a cation and an anion ? How are they formed ? Give the names
and symbols of one cation and one anion.
Solution :
A positively charged ion is known as cation. A cation is formed by the loss of one or more
electrons by an atom. For example: sodium loses 1 electron to form a sodium ion, Na + , which
is a cation.
A negatively charged ion is known as anion. An anion is formed by the gain of one or more
electrons by an atom. For example: A chlorine atom gains (accepts) 1 electron to form a
chloride ion, Cl – , which is an anion.

Question 37:
Using electron-dot diagrams which show only the outermost shell electrons, show how a
molecule of nitrogen, N2, is formed from two nitrogen atoms. What name is given to this type
of bonding ? (Atomic number of nitrogen is 7)
Solution :
Since nitrogen has 5 electrons in its outermost shell so, to achieve the 8-electron structure of
an inert gas, it needs 3 more electrons and hence combines with another nitrogen atom to
form a molecule of nitrogen gas.

This type of bonding is called covalent bonding.

Question 38:
Draw the electron-dot structures of the following compounds and state the type of bonding in



each case :
(i) CO2 (ii) MgO (iii) H,O (iv) HCl (v) MgCl2
Solution :

Question 39:
Using electron-dot diagrams which show only the outermost shell electrons, show how a
molecule of oxygen, O2, is formed from two oxygen atoms. What name is given to this type of
bonding ? (At. No. of oxygen = 8)
Solution :
Since an oxygen atom has 6 electrons in its outermost shell so, it needs 2 more electrons to
achieve the stable 8-electron inert gas configuration. Hence, it combines with another oxygen
atom and forms a molecule of oxygen.

This type of bonding is called a double covalent bond.

Question 40:
Draw the electron-dot structures of the following compounds and state the type of bonding in
each case :
(i) KCl (ii) NH3 (iii) CaO (iv) N2 (iv) CaCl2
Solution :



Question 41:
Explain why, a salt which does not conduct electricity in the solid state becomes a good
conductor in molten state.
Solution :
Although solid ionic compounds are made up of ions but they do not conduct electricity in
solid state. This is because in the solid ionic compound, the ions are held together in fixed
positions by strong electrostatic forces and cannot move freely. However, when we dissolve
the ionic solid in water or melt it, the crystal structure is broken down and ions become free to
move and conduct electricity. Thus, an aqueous solution of an ionic compound conducts
electricity because there are plenty of free ions in the solution which are able to conduct
electric current.

Question 42:
(a) Write down the electronic configuration of (i) sodium atom, and (ii) chlorine atom.
(b) How many electrons are there in the outermost shell of (i) a sodium atom, and (ii) a chlorine
atom ?
(c) Show the formation of NaCl from sodium and chlorine atoms by the transfer of electron(s).
(d) Why has sodium chloride a high melting point ?
(e) Name the anode and the cathode used in the electrolytic refining of impure copper metal.
Solution :
(a) (i) Sodium – 2, 8, 1 (ii) Chlorine – 2, 8, 7
(b) (i) Sodium = 1 (ii) Chlorine = 7
(c)

(d) Sodium chloride has a high melting point because it is an ionic compound and these
compounds are made of up of positive and negative ions. There is a strong force of attraction
between the oppositely charged ions, so, a lot of heat energy is required to break this force of
attraction and melt or boil the ionic compound.
(e) Anode: Thick block of impure copper metal; Cathode: Thin strip of p ure copper metal

Question 43:
(a) Write the electron arrangement in (i) a magnesium atom, and (ii) an oxygen atom.
(b) How many electrons are there in the valence shell of (i) a magnesium atom, and (ii) an
oxygen atom ?
(c) Show on a diagram the transfer of electrons between the atoms in the formation of MgO.
(d) Name the solvent in which ionic compounds are generally soluble.
(e) Why are aqueous solutions of ionic compounds able to conduct electricity ?
Solution :
(a) (i) Magnesium -2, 8, 2
(ii) Oxygen – 2, 6
(b) (i) Magnesium = 2
(ii) Oxygen = 6
(c)



(d) Water .
(e) An aqueous solution of an ionic compound conducts electricity because there are plenty of
free ions in the solution which are able to conduct electric current.

Question 44:
(a) What is the electronic configuration of (i) a sodium atom, and (ii) an oxygen atom ?
(b) What is the number of outermost electrons in (i) a sodium atom, and (ii) an oxygen atom ?
(c) Show the formation of Na20 by the transfer of electrons between the combining atoms.
(d) Why are ionic compounds usually hard ?
(e) How is it that ionic compounds in the solid state do not conduct electricity but they do so
when in molten state ?
Solution :
(a) (i) 2,8,1 (ii) 2,6
(b) (i) 1 (ii) 6
(c)

(d)I onic compounds are usually hard because their oppositely charged ions attract one
another strongly and form a regular crystal structure.
(e) Although solid ionic compounds are made up of ions but they do not conduct electricity in
solid state. This is because in the solid ionic compound the ions are held together in fixed
positions by strong electrostatic forces and cannot move freely. However, when we dissolve
the ionic solid in water or melt it, the crystal structure is broken down and ions become free to
move and conduct electricity. Thus, an aqueous solution of an ionic compound conducts
electricity because there are plenty of free ions in the solution which are able to conduct
electric current.

Question 45:
(a) Write down the electron arrangement in (i) a magnesium atom, and (ii) a chlorine atom.
(b) How many electrons are there in the valence shell of (i) a magnesium atom, and (ii) a
chlorine atom ?
(c) Show the formation of magnesium chloride from magnesium and chlorine by the transfer
of electrons.
(d) State whether magnesium chloride will conduct electricity or not. Give reason for your
answer.
(e) Why are covalent compounds generally poor conductors of electricity ?
Solution :
(a)(i) Magnesium: 2, 8, 2 (ii) Chlorine: 2, 8, 7
(b)(i) 2 (ii) 7
(c)

(d)Magnesium chloride will conduct electricity because it is an ionic compound .
(e) Covalent compounds are generally poor conductors of electricity b ecause they do not
contain ions.



Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:171

Question 67:
Two non-metals combine with each other by the sharing of electrons to form a compound X.
(a) What type of chemical bond is present in X ?
(b) State whether X will have a high melting point or low melting point.
(c) Will it be a good conductor of electricity or not ?
(d) Will it dissolve in an organic solvent or not ?
Solution :
(a) Covalent bond
(b) Low melting point
(c) No
(d) Yes

Question 68:
A metal combines with a non-metal by the transfer of electrons to form a compound Y.
(i) State the type of bonds in Y.
(ii) What can you say about its melting point and boiling point ?
(iii) Will it be a good conductor of electricity ?
(iv) Will it dissolve in an organic solvent or not ?
Solution :
(i) Ionic bond
(ii) High melting point and boiling point
(iii) Yes
(iv) No

Question 69:
The electronic configurations of three elements X, Y and Z are as follows :
X     2, 4
Y     2,1
Z     2, 1
(a) Which two elements will combine to form an ionic compound ?
(b) Which two elements will react to form a covalent compound ?
Give reasons for your choice.
Solution :
(a) Y and Z will form an ionic compound because an ionic bond is formed when one of the
atoms can donate electrons to achieve the inert gas configuration, and the other atom needs
electrons to achieve the inert gas configuration. Since Y has 7 and Z has 1 electron in their
outermost shell, they would form an ionic bond.
(b) X and Y will react to form a covalent compound because a covalent bond is formed when
both the reacting atoms need electrons to achieve the inert gas electron arrangement.

Question 70:
An element A has 4 valence electrons in its atom whereas element B has only one valence
electron in its atom. The compound formed by A and B does not conduct electricity. What is
the nature of chemical bond in the compound formed ? Give its electron-dot structure.
Solution :
Covalent bond will be formed since covalent compounds are non conductors of electricity.



Question 71:
In the formation of a compound XY2 atom X gives one electron to each Y atom. What is the
nature of bond in XY2 ? Give two properties of XY2.
Solution :
XY2 has ionic bonds.
(i) XY 2 would conduct electricity when dissolved in water.
(ii) XY 2 would have high melting and boiling point.

Question 72:
An element ‘A’ has two electrons in the outermost shell of its atom and combines with an
element ‘B’ having seven electrons in the outermost shell, forming the compound AB2. The
compound when dissolved in water conducts electric current. Giving reasons, state the nature
of chemical bond in the compound.
Solution :
AB2 forms ionic bonds because an aqueous solution of an ionic compound conducts
electricity because there are plenty of free ions in the solution which are able to conduct
electric current.

Question 73:
The electronic configurations of two elements A and B are given below :
A    2, 6
B    2, 8, 1
(a) What type of chemical bond is formed between the two atoms of A ?
(b) What type of chemical bond will be formed between the atoms of A and B ?
Solution :
(a) Covalent bond.
(b) Ionic bond .

Question 74:
Four elements A, B, C and D have the following electron arrangements in their atoms :
A    2, 8, 6
B    2, 8, 8
C    2, 8, 8, 1
D    2,1
(a) What type of bond is formed when element C combines with element D ?
(b) Which element is an inert gas ?
(c) What will be the formula of the compound between A and C ?
Solution :
(a) Ionic bond will be formed; element C donates its electron to element D.
(b) B is an inert gas; has complete octet configuration.
(c) C 2 A; element A needs two electrons to complete its octet.

Question 75:
An element X of atomic number 12 combines with an element Y of atomic number 17 to form
a compound XY2. State the nature of chemical bond in XY2 and show how the electron
configurations of X and Y change in the formation of this compound.
Solution :
XY2 forms ionic bo nd. The electronic configuration of X changes from 2, 8, 2 to 2, 8, it donates
its 2 electrons to two Y atoms. Hence, the elec tronic configuration of Y changes f rom 2, 8, 7
to 2, 8, 8 giving the compound XY2.

Question 76:



The electronic configurations of three elements A, B and C are as follows :
A    2, 8, 1
B    2, 8, 7
C    2, 4
(a) Which of these elements is a metal ?
(b) Which of these elements are non-metals ?
(c) Which two elements will combine to form an ionic bond ?
(d) Which two elements will combine to form a covalent bond ?
(e) Which element will form an anion of valency 1 ?
Solution :
(a) A is a metal
(b) B and C are non-metals
(c) A and B combines to form an ionic bond.
(d) B and C combines to form a covalent bond.
(e) B will form an anion with valency 1 since it needs only 1 electron to complete its octet.

Question 77:
The electronic configurations of four particles A, B, C and D are given below :
A    2, 8, 8
B    2, 8, 2
C    2, 6
D    2, 8
Which electronic configuration represents :
(i) magnesium atom ? (ii) oxygen atom ?
(iii) sodium ion ? (iv) chloride ion ?
Solution :
(i) B: Magnesium atom (At. no. = 12)
(ii) C: Oxygen atom (At. no. = 8)
(iii) D: Sodium ion (E.C = 2, 8)
(iv) A: Chloride ion (E.C = 2, 8, 8)

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:172

Question 78:
The atomic number of an element X is 12.
(a) What must an atom of X do to attain the nearest inert gas electron configuration ?
(b) Which inert gas is nearest to X ?
Solution :
(a) An atom of X loses 2 electrons to attain the nearest gas electron configuration (2,8).
(b) Neon

Question 79:
The atomic number of an element Y is 16.
(a) What must an atom of Y do to achieve the nearest inert gas electron arrangement ?
(b) Which inert gas is nearest to Y ?
Solution :
(a) A n atom of Y a ccepts 2 electrons to achieve the nearest inert gas electron arrangement
(2, 8, 8).
(b) Argon

Question 80:
You can buy solid air-freshners in shops. Do you think these substances are ionic or covalent ?



Why ?
Solution :
Solid air-fresheners are covalent compounds because they are volatile compounds with low
melting and boiling points.

Question 81:
Give the formulae of the chlorides of the elements X and Y having atomic numbers of 3 and 6
respectively. Will the properties of the two chlorides be similar or different ? Explain your
answer.
Solution :
Formula of chloride of element X is XCl
Formula of chloride of element Y is YCl 4
The properties of two chlorides will be different because XCl is an i onic chloride whereas YCl
4 is a covalent chloride.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:191

Question 1:
A zinc ore gave CO2 on treatment with a dilute add. Identify the ore and write its chemical
formula.
Solution :
Calamine, ZnC O 3

Question 2:
What chemical process is used for obtaining a metal from its oxide ?
Solution :
Reduction .

Question 3:
State two ways to prevent the rusting of iron.
Solution :
Rusting of iron can be prevented:
(i) By painting.
(ii) By applying grease or oil.

Question 4:
What is meant by galvanisation ? Why is it done ?
Solution :
The process of depositing a thin layer of zinc metal on iron objects is called galvanisation; It
prevents iron from rusting.

Question 5:
Name the metal which is used for galvanising iron.
Solution :
Zinc is used for galvanising iron.

Question 6:
Explain why, iron sheets are coated with zinc.
Solution :
Zinc is a quite reactive metal. The action of air on zinc metal forms a very thin coating of zinc
oxide all over it, which is hard and impervious to air and hence prevents the further corrosion
of zinc metal as well as the iron below it.



Question 7:
Why do we apply paint on iron articles ?
Solution :
Iron objects are painted so that air and moisture can not come in contact with the iron objects
and hence no rusting takes place.

Question 8:
Give reason for the following :
Carbonate and sulphide ores are usually converted into oxides during the process of extraction
of metals.
Solution :
Carbonate and sulphide ores are usually converted into oxides because it is easier to obtain
metals from their oxides (by reduction) than from carbonates or sulphides.

Question 9:
Name a reducing agent that may be used to obtain manganese from manganese dioxide.
Solution :
Aluminium powder is used as the reducing agent for the extraction of manganese from its
oxide.

Question 10:
Name an alloy of lead and tin.
Solution :
Solder is an alloy of lead and tin.

Question 11:
Give the composition of an alloy called solder. State its one property and one use.
Solution :
Solder is an alloy of lead (Pb) and tin (Sn). It contains both the elements in 50-50 ratio. It has a
low melting point and is used for soldering electrical wires together.

Question 12:
What is an amalgam ?
Solution :
An alloy of mercury metal with one or more other metals is known as an amalgam.

Question 13:
How many carats is pure gold ? Why is pure gold not suitable for making ornaments ?
Solution :
Pure gold is said to be of 24 carats. It is not suitable for making ornaments because it is very
soft.

Question 14:
Name one method for the refining of metals.
Solution :
Electrolytic refining.

Question 15:
State two conditions for the rusting of iron.
Solution :
(i) Presence of air (oxygen).
(ii) Presence of water (or moisture).



Question 16:
In one method of rust prevention, the iron is not coated with anything. Which is this method ?
Solution :
Rusting of iron can be prevented by alloying iron with chromium and nickel to make stainless
steel.

Question 17:
Name two alloys of iron. What elements are present in these alloys ?
Solution :
Steel – Iron and carbon.
Stainless steel – Iron, chromium and nickel.

Question 18:
Give reason for the following :
Silver, gold and platinum are used to make jewellery.
Solution :
Silver, gold and platinum are used to make jewellery b ecause all of these metals have a bright
shiny surface and are resistant to corrosion.

Question 19:
Which metal becomes black in the presence of hydrogen sulphide gas in air ?
Solution :
Silver metal becomes black in the presence of hydrogen sulphide gas in air .

Question 20:
Name the gas in air which tarnishes silver articles slowly.
Solution :
Hydrogen sulphide gas tarnishes silver articles .

Question 21:
Silver metal does not combine easily with oxygen but silver jewellery tarnishes after some
time. How ?
Solution :
The silver articles combine slowly with the hydrogen sulphide gas present in air to form a black
coating of silver sulphide. The tarnishing of the silver objects is due to this silver sulphide
coating on the object’s surface.

Question 22:
Write the composition of the alloy called bronze. Give two uses of bronze.
Solution :
Bronze is an alloy of copper and tin; 90% copper and 10% tin. It is used for making statues and
coins.

Question 23:
Why does a new aluminium vessel lose shine so soon after use ?
Solution :
A new aluminium vessel lose shine so soon after use due to the corrosion of aluminium metal
when exposed to moist air. This happens because the oxygen of air reacts with aluminium to
form a thin, dull layer of aluminium oxide all over the vessel.

Question 24:
Why do gold ornaments look new even after several years of use ?



Solution :
Gold ornaments look new even after several years of use because gold does not corrode when
exposed to atmosphere. It is a highly unreactive metal which remains unaffected by air, water
vapour and other gases in the atmosphere.

Question 25:
Name two metals which are highly resistant to corrosion.
Solution :
Gold and platinum are highly resistant to corrosion.

Question 26:
Which property of ‘solder’ alloy makes it suitable for welding electrical wires ?
Solution :
Low melting point of solder makes it sutaible for welding electrical wires .

Question 27:
Explain why, carbon cannot reduce oxides of sodium or magnesium.
Solution :
Carbon cannot reduce oxides of sodium or magnesium because carbon is less reactive than
magnesium or sodium. Carbon, which is a non-metal, is more reactive than zinc and can be
placed just above Zn in the reactivity series. Hence, carbon can reduce the oxides of zinc and
all other metals below zinc to form metals.

Question 28:
Why are the metals like Na, K, Ca and Mg never found in their free state in nature ?
Solution :
The metals like Na, K, Ca and Mg never found in their free state in nature because of the
reason that all of these metals are high-up in the reactivity series. And just because they are so
reactive, they are never found in nature as free elements.

Question 29:
Name one metal each which is extracted by :
(a) reduction with carbon. (b) electrolytic reduction.
(c) reduction with aluminium (d) reduction with heat alone.
Solution :
(a) Zinc
(b) Sodium
(c) Manganese
(d) Mercury

Question 30:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The corrosion of iron is called…………………
(b) …………….and………………. are necessary for the rusting of iron.
(c) The process of depositing a thin layer of zinc on iron articles is called…………………………..
(d) Tiffin boxes are electroplated with…………………… but car bumpers are electroplated
with………………………. to protect them from rusting.
(e) The corrosion of copper produces a…………………. coating of basic copper carbonate on its
surface.
(f) Brass is an alloy of copper and……………………..
(g) Bronze is an alloy of copper and………………..
(h) The non-metal present in steel is…………………



(i) The alloy in which one of the metals is mercury is called an………………………..
(j) The electrical conductivity and melting point of an alloy is…………………………. than that of pure
metals.
(k) The rocky material found with ores is called……………………
Solution :
(a) rusting
(b) air; water
(c) galvanisation
(d) tin; chromium
(e) green
(j) zinc
(g) tin
(h) carbon
(i) amalgam
(j) less
(k) gangue

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:192

Question 31:
How is manganese extracted from manganese dioxide, MnO2 ? Explain with the help of an
equation.
Solution :
Manganese metal is extracted by the reduction of its oxide with aluminium powder as the
reducing agent. Thus, when manganese dioxide is heated with aluminium powder, then
manganese metal is formed.

Question 32:
What is a thermite reaction ? Explain with the help of an equation. State one use of this
reaction.
Solution :
The reduction of a metal oxide to form metal by using aluminium powder as a reducing agent
is called a thermite reaction.
This property of reduction by aluminium is made use of in thermite welding for joining the
broken pieces of heavy iron objects like girders etc.
A mixture of Iron (III) oxide and aluminium powder is ignited with a burning magnesium ribbon.
Aluminium reduces iron oxide to produce iron metal with the evolution of a lot of heat. Due to
this heat, iron metal is produced in the molten state. This molten iron is then poured between
the broken iron pieces to weld them (to join them).

Question 33:
Which one of the methods given in column I is applied for the extraction of each of the metals
given in column II :



Solution :
Electrolytic reduction: Aluminium and Sodium;
Reduction with carbon : Zinc, Iron and Tin;
Reduction with aluminium: Manganese

Question 34:
(a) Give reason why copper is used to make hot water tanks but steel (an alloy of iron) is not.
(b) Explain why, the surface of some metals acquires a dull appearance when exposed to air
for a long time.
Solution :
(a) Copper does not corrode easily in the presence of water but steel rusts in the presence of
water.
(b) The surface of some metals acquires a dull appearance when exposed to air b ecause of
the formation of an oxide layer on the surface of the metal.

Question 35:
(a) Why does aluminium not corrode right through ?
(b) What is meant by ‘anodising’ ? Why is it done ?
Solution :
(a) Aluminium does not corrode right through because aluminium is more reactive than iron
and it forms a layer of aluminium oxide as soon as it comes in contact with moist air. This
aluminium oxide layer is very tough and prevents the aluminium underneath from corroding.
(b) The process of thickening of aluminium oxide layer on the surface of aluminium objects by
electrolysis is called anodizing. It is done to provide more protection to the aluminium object
from corrosion.

Question 36:
(a) Why is an iron grill painted frequently ?
(b) Explain why, though aluminium is more reactive than iron, yet there is less corrosion of
aluminium when both are exposed to air.
Solution :
(a) An iron grill is painted frequently to prevent its rusting .
(b)There is less corrosion of aluminium than iron when both are exposed to air because
aluminium forms a layer of aluminium oxide on its surface as soon as it comes in contact with
moist air. This aluminium oxide is very tough and prevents it from corroding right through.

Question 37:
(a) Name the method by which aluminium metal is extracted.
(b) Give the name and chemical formula of one ore of copper.
(c) How is zinc extracted from its carbonate ore (calamine) ? Explain with equations.
Solution :
(a) Electrolytic reduction .
(b)Copper glance (Cu 2 S)



(c) When calamine ore is heated strongly in the absence of air i.e. calcined, it decomposes to
form zinc oxide and carbon dioxide.

Question 38:
(a) Name two metals which occur in nature in free state as well as in combined state.
(b) Name one ore of manganese. Which compound of manganese is present in this ore ? Also
write its chemical formula.
(c) A zinc ore on heating in air forms sulphur dioxide. Describe briefly any two stages involved
in the conversion of this concentrated ore into zinc metal.
Solution :
(a) Copper and Silver occur in nature in free state as well as in combined state.
(b) Pyrolusite; Manganese dioxide; MnO 2
(c)
(i) Roasting: When zinc sulphide (zinc blende ore) is strongly heated in air (roasted), it forms
zinc oxide and sulphur dioxide.
(ii) Reduction: Zinc oxide obtained is heated with carbon to form zinc metal.

Question 39:
How does the method used for extracting a metal from its ore depend on the metal’s position
in the reactivity series ? Explain with examples.
Solution :
Different methods are used for extracting metals belonging to category of highly reactive
metals, moderately reactive metals and less reactive metals. This is because the extraction of
a metal from its concentrated ore is essentially a process of reduction of the metal compound
present in the ore. For example: Manganese metal is obtained by the reduction of its oxide
with aluminium powder and not carbon. This is because carbon is less reactive than
manganese. Carbon, which is a non-metal, is more reactive than zinc and it can be placed just
above Zn in the reactivity series. Hence, carbon can reduce the oxides of zinc and all other
metals below zinc to form metals

Question 40:
Explain giving one example, how highly reactive metals (which are high up in the reactivity
series) are extracted.
Solution :
The highly reactive metals are extracted by the electrolytic reduction of their molten chlorides
or oxides.
Example: Sodium metal is extracted by the electrolytic reduction of molten sodium chloride.
When electric current is passed through molten sodium chloride, it decomposes to form
sodium metal and chlorine gas.

Question 41:
Describe with one example, how moderately reactive metals (which are in the middle of
reactivity series) are extracted.
Solution :



The moderately reactive metals are extracted by the reduction of their oxides with carbon,
aluminium, sodium or calcium.
Example: When zinc sulphide (zinc blende ore) is strongly heated in air (roasted), it forms zinc
oxide and sulphur dioxide. This process is called roasting. Then, zinc oxide is heated with
carbon to form zinc metal. This process is termed as reduction.

Question 42:
How are the less reactive metals (which are quite low in the reactivity series) extracted ?
Explain with the help of an example.
Solution :
The less reactive metals are extracted by the reduction of their oxides by heat alone.
Example: Mercury (II) sulphide ore is roasted in air when mercury (II) oxide is formed. When
this mercury (II) oxide is heated to about 300oC, it decomposes to form mercury metal.

Question 43:
What is meant by refining of a metal ? Name the most widely used method for the refining of
impure metals obtained by various reduction processes. Describe this method with the help of
a labelled diagram by taking the example of any metal.
Solution :
The process of purifying impure metals is called refining of metals.
Electrolytic refining is the most widely used method for the refining of impure metals obtained
by various reduction processes.
In an electrolytic tank, acidified copper sulphate (CuSO 4 + dil ute H 2 O 4 ) solution forms the
electrolyte. A block of impure copper is made into an anode by connecting the positive
terminal of a power supply (battery). A thin strip of highly pure copper metal is the cathode of
the cell. The negative terminal of the power supply is connected to it.

A small electric curr ent is passed through the cell. Atoms from the anode enter the
electrolyte. The copper from the anode gets converted into copper sulphide. An equal number
of copper atoms from the solution get deposited on the cathode. This is to keep the
concentration of the solution constant. Impurities from the anode block either remain in
solution or collect below the anode, as they are unable to displace copper from the sulphate
solution. The insoluble impurities remain in the electrolyte and are called anode mud.
Copper sulphate solution contains ions of Cu ++ and SO 4 — . The following reactions take
place at the anode and cathode when an electric current is passed.

Pure copper is scraped or removed from the cathode. Anode becomes thinner as the
electrolysis process proceeds. Some important metals like gold and silver are present in the
anode mud. These can be recovered separately.

Question 44:



(a) Define the terms (i) mineral (ii) ore, and (iii) gangue.
(b) What is meant by the ‘concentration of ore’ ?
(c) Name one ore of copper (other than cuprite). Which compound of copper is present in this
ore ? Also, write its chemical formula.
Solution :
(a) (i) Minerals – The natural materials in which the metals or their compounds are found in
earth are called minerals.
(ii) Ores – Those minerals from which the metals can be extracted conveniently and profitably
are called ores.
(iii) Gangue – The unwanted impurities like sand, rocky material, earthy particles etc., present
in an ore are called gangue.
(b) Before extracting metal from an ore, it is necessary to remove these impurities (gangue)
from it. By removing the gangue, we get a concentrated ore containing a much higher
percentage of metal. This is called concentration of ore; also known as enrichment of ore.
(c) Ore: Copper glance; Copper (I) sulphide, Cu 2 S.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:193

Question 45:
Explain how, a reduction reaction of aluminium can be used for welding cracked machine
parts of iron. Write a chemical equation for the reaction involved.
Solution :
A mixture of Iron (III) oxide and aluminium powder is ignited with a burning magnesium ribbon.
Aluminium reduces iron oxide to produce iron metal with the evolution of lot of heat. Due to
this heat, iron metal is produced in the molten state. This molten iron is poured between
broken iron parts of the machine to weld them (to join them).

Question 46:
(a) What is corrosion ?
(b) Name any two metals which do not corrode easily.
(c) What is the corrosion of iron known as ?
(d) Explain why, aluminium is a highly reactive metal, still it is used to make utensils for
cooking.
Solution :
(a) The eating up of metals by the action of air, moisture or a chemical (such as an acid) on
their surface is called corrosion.
(b) Gold and Platinum
(c) Rusting
(d) Aluminium begins to corrode quickly when it comes in contact with moist air. The action of
moist air on aluminium metal forms a thin layer of aluminium oxide all over the metal. This
aluminium oxide is very tough and prevents the metal underneath from further corrosion.
Therefore, aluminium is used for making utensils irrespective of its highly reactive property as
its corrosion leads to the non-corrosion of the metal in the longer run.

Question 47:
What is meant by ‘rusting of iron’ ? With the help of labelled diagrams, describe an activity to
find out the conditions under which iron rusts.
Solution :
When an iron object is left in damp air (or water) for a considerable time, it gets covered with a
red-brown flaky substance called rust. This is called rusting of iron .



Experiment to show that rusting of Iron requires both, air and water :
We take three test-tubes and put one clean iron nail in each of the three test-tubes:

1. In the first test-tube containing iron nail, we put some anhydrous calcium chloride and close
its mouth with a tight cork . Anhydrous calcium chloride absorbs water moisture from the
damp air present in the test-tube and make it dry. In this way, the iron nail in the first test-tube
is kept in dry air (having no water vapour in it).
2. In the second test-tube containing iron nail , we put boiled distilled water. Boiled water does
not contain any dissolved air (or oxygen) in it (this is because the process of boiling removes
all the dissolved air from it). A layer of oil is put over boiled water in the test-tub e to prevent
the outside air from mixing with boiled water. In this way, the iron nail in the second test-tube
is kept in air free boiled water.
3. In the third test-tube containing an iron nail, we put unboiled wa ter so that about two-thirds
of nail is immersed in water and the rest is a bove the water, exposed to damp air. In this way ,
the iron nail in the third test-tube has been placed in air and water together.
The mouth of all three test tube s is cl osed with a cork and it is kept aside for about one week.
After one week, we observe the iron nails kept in all the three test-tubes, one by one. We find
tha t (i) No rust is seen on the surface of iron nai l kept in dry air (water-f ree air) in the first
test-tube. This tells us that rusting of iron does not take place in air alone.
(ii) No rust is seen on the surface of iron nail kept in air-free, boiled water in the second test-
tube. This tells us that rusting of iron does not take place in water alone.
(iii) Red-brown rust is seen on the surface of iron nail kept in the presence of both air and wat
er together the third test-tube. This tells us that rusting of iron takes pla ce in the presence of
both air and water together.

Question 48:
(a) What is an alloy ? How is an alloy made ?
(b) What elements are present in steel ? How are the properties of steel different from those of
pure iron ?
(c) Give the constituents and one use of brass.
Solution :
(a) An alloy is a homogeneous mixture of two or more metals (or a metal and small amount of
non-metals). An alloy is prepared by mixing the various metals in molten state in required
proportions, and then cooling their mixture to the room temperature.
(b) Steel contains iron and carbon.
This alloy of iron (steel) is hard and strong. It also rusts less readily than pure iron.
(c) Brass contains copper and zinc.
Brass is used for making cooking utensils.

Question 49:
(a) Name two metals which resist corrosion due to the formation of a thin, hard and
impervious layer of oxide on their surface.
(b) Name five methods of preventing rusting of iron.



(c) What are the constituents of stainless steel ? What are the special properties of stainless
steel ?
Solution :
(a) Aluminium and Zinc resist corrosion due to the formation of a thin, hard and impervious
layer of oxide on their surface.
(b)(i) Painting (ii) Applying grease or oil (iii) Galvanisation (iv) Tin and chromium plating (v)
Alloying to form stainless steel.
(c)Stainless steel contains i ron, chromium and nickel.
Stainless steel does not rust at all and is strong and tough.

Question 50:
(a) Name an alloy of copper. State its chemical composition and any one use.
(b) Explain why, when a copper object remains in damp air for a considerable time, a green
coating is formed on its surface. What is this process known as ?
Solution :
(a) Brass:It contains Copper (Cu)-80% and Zinc(Zn) – 20%. It is used for making cooking
utensils.
(b) When a copper object remains in damp air for a considerable time, then copper reacts
slowly with the carbon dioxide and water of air to form a green coating of basic copper
carbonate on the surface of the object. The formation of this green coating of basic copper
carbonate corrodes it. This process is known as corrosion of copper.

Question 51:
(a) How does the painting of an iron object prevent its rusting ?
(b) How does the electrical conductivity of copper alloys, brass and bronze, differ from that of
pure copper ?
(c) What is meant by 22 carat gold ? Name the metals which are usually alloyed with gold to
make it harder.
Solution :
(a) When a coat of paint is applied to the surface of an iron object, it prevents air and moisture
to come in contact with the object; hence no rusting takes place.
(b) The electrical conductivity of copper alloys like brass and bronze is less than that of pure
copper.
(c) It means that 22 parts pure gold is alloyed with 2 parts of either silver or copper for making
ornaments; Silver and copper are usually alloyed with gold to make it harder .

Question 52:
Explain giving equation, what happens when :
(a) ZnCO3 is heated in the absence of air ?
(b) a mixture of CU2O and CU2S is heated ?
Solution :
(a) When zinc carbonate is heated strongly in the absence of air, it decomposes to form zinc
oxide and carbon dioxide.

(b) When copper (I) oxide reacts with copper (I) sulphide, it forms copper metal and sulphur
dioxide.

Question 53:
(a) For the reduction of a metal oxide, suggest a reducing agent other than carbon.



(b) Explain why, an aqueous solution of sodium chloride is not used for the electrolytic
extraction of sodium metal.
Solution :
(a) Aluminium can be used a reducing agent other than carbon.
(b) We cannot use an aqueous solution of sodium chloride to obtain sodium metal because if
we electrolyse an aqueous solution of sodium chloride, then as soon as sodium metal is
produced at cathode, it will react with water present in the aqueous solution to form sodium
hydroxide. Hence, electrolysis of an aqueous solution of sodium chloride will produce sodium
hydroxide and not sodium metal.

Question 54:
How are metals refined by the electrolytic process ? Describe the electrolytic refining of copper
with the help of a neat labelled diagram.
Solution :
For the refining of an impure metal by the process of electrolysis, a thick block of impure metal
is made anode (connected to +ve terminal of the battery) and a thin strip of the pure metal is
made cathode (connected to -ve terminal of battery). A water soluble salt (of the metal to be
refined) is taken as electrolyte. On passing current, impure metal dissolves from the anode
and goes into the electrolyte solution. And pure metal from the electrolyte deposits on the
cathode.
Electrolytic refining of copper: In an electrolytic tank, acidified copper sulphate (CuSO 4 + dil
ute H 2 O 4 ) solution forms the electrolyte. A block of impure copper is made into an anode by
connecting the positive terminal of a power supply (battery). A thin strip of highly pure copper
metal is the cathode of the cell. The negative terminal of the power supply is connected to it.

A small electric curr ent is passed through the cell. Atoms from the anode enter the
electrolyte. The copper from the anode gets converted into copper sulphide. An equal number
of copper atoms from the solution get deposited on the cathode. This is to keep the
concentration of the solution constant. Impurities from the anode block either remain in
solution or collect below the anode, as they are unable to displace copper form the sulphate
solution. The insoluble impurities remain in the electrolyte and are called anode mud.
Copper sulphate solution contains ions of Cu ++ and SO 4 — . The following reactions take
place at the anode and cathode when an electric current is passed.

Pure copper is scraped or removed from the cathode. Anode becomes thinner as the
electrolysis process proceeds. Some important metals like gold and silver are present in the
anode mud. These can be recovered separately.

Question 55:
(a) Name the chemical compound which is electrolysed in molten state to obtain aluminium
metal. Which gas is evolved during this process ?



(b) Name the chemical compound which is electrolysed in molten state to obtain sodium
metal. Which gas is produced in this process ?
(c) Name the gas produced when calamine ore is calcined.
(d) Name the gas evolved when cinnabar ore is roasted.
Solution :
(a) Aluminium oxide is electrolysed in molten state to obtain aluminium metal. Oxygen gas is
evolved during the process.
(b) Sodium chloride is electrolysed in molten state to obtain sodium metal. Chlorine gas is
evolved during this process.
(c) Carbon dioxide is produced when calamine ore is calcined.
(d) Sulphur dioxide gas is evolved when cinnabar ore is roasted.

Question 56:
(a) Name two metals which are found in nature mainly in the free state (as metallic elements).
(b) Name two metals which are always found in combined state.
(c) What iron compound is present in haematite ore ? Also write its chemical formula.
Solution :
(a) Gold and Platinum are found in nature mainly in the free state.
(b) Sodium and Magnesium are always found in combined state.
(c) Iron (III) oxide; Fe 2 O 3 is present in haematite ore.

Question 57:
(a) What is the difference between a mineral and an ore ?
(b) Which metal is extracted from cinnabar ore ?
(c) Name one ore of sodium. Name the sodium compound present in this ore and write its
chemical formula.
(d) How is sodium metal extracted ? Explain with the help of equation of the reaction involved.
(e) Name three other metals which are extracted in a manner similar to sodium.
Solution :
(a)The natural materials in which the metals or their compounds are found in earth are called
minerals. Those minerals from which the metals can be extracted conveniently and profitably
are called ores.
(b) Mercury.
(c)Rock salt – Sodium chloride, NaCl.
(d)Sodium metal is extracted by the electrolytic reduction of molten sodium chloride. When
electric current is passed through molten sodium chloride, it decomposes to form sodium
metal and chlorine gas.

(e) Potassium, Calcium and Magnesium .

Question 58:
(a) Name the metal which is extracted from haematite ore.
(b) Name one ore of aluminium. Name the aluminium compound present in this ore and write
its chemical formula.
(c) How is aluminium metal extracted ? Explain with the help of an equation.
(d) Name the electrode at which aluminium metal is produced.
(e) Which gas is produced during the extraction of aluminium ? At which electrode is this gas
produced ?
Solution :
(a)Iron is extracted from haematite ore .
(b)Bauxite; Aluminium oxide, Al 2 O 3 .2H 2 O



(c)Aluminium metal is extracted by the electrolytic reduction (electrolysis) of molten
aluminium oxide. When electric current is passed through molten aluminium oxide, it
decomposes to form aluminium metal and oxygen gas.

(d) A luminium metal is produced at Cathode (Negative electrode).
(e) Oxygen gas is produced; at anode (Positive electrode).

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:194

Question 59:
(a) Which metal is extracted from bauxite ore ?
(b) Give the name of one ore of iron. Which iron compound is present in this ore ? Write its
chemical formula.
(c) Describe the extraction of zinc metal from its sulphide ore (zinc blende). Write equations of
the reactions involved.
(d) Explain why, the galvanised iron article is protected against rusting even if the zinc layer is
broken.
(e) Name a common metal which is highly resistant to corrosion.
Solution :
(a) Aluminium.
(b) Haematite; Iron (III) oxide, Fe 2 O 3
(c) Zinc sulphide (zinc blende ore) is strongly heated in air (roasted), it forms zinc oxide and
sulphur dioxide. This process is called roasting.

(d) The galvanized iron object remains protected against rusting even if a break occurs in the
zinc layer because zinc is more easily oxidised than iron. Hence, the zinc continues to corrode
but iron object does not corrode or rust.
(e) Aluminium .

Question 60:
(a) Name the metal which is extracted from the ore called ‘rock salt’.
(b) Name two ores of zinc. Write the names of the chemical compounds present in them and
give their chemical formulae.
(c) Explain how, mercury is extracted from its sulphide ore (cinnabar). Give equations of the
reactions involved.
(d) In the electrolytic refining of a metal M, what would you take as anode, cathode and
electrolyte ?
(e) Name any five metals which are purified by electrolytic refining method.
Solution :
(a) Sodium.
(b) (i) Calamine; Zinc carbonate, ZnCO 3
(ii) Zinc blende; Zinc sulphide, ZnS
(c) Mercury (II) sulphide ore is roasted in air when mercury (II) oxide is formed.

(d) Anode – Thick block of i mpure metal M



Cathode – Thin strip of p ure metal M
Electrolyte – Water soluble salt (of metal M).
(e) (i) Copper
(ii) Zinc
(iii) Nickel
(iv) Gold
(v) Silver

Question 61:
(a) Which metal is extracted from calamine ore ?
(b) Name one ore of mercury. Which mercury compound is present in this ore ? Write its
chemical formula.
(c) How is copper extracted from its sulphide ore (copper glance), Cu2S ? Explain with
equations of the reactions involved.
(d) What is an alloy ? Give two examples of alloys.
(e) How are the properties of an alloy different from those of the constitutent elements ?
Solution :
(a) Zinc
(b) Cinnabar; Mercury (II) sulphide, HgS
(c) The concentrated copper (I) sulphide ore (copper glance), Cu 2 S is roasted in air when a
part of copper (I) sulphide is oxidised to copper (I) oxide.

When a good amount of copper (I) sulphide has been converted to copper (I) oxide, then the
supply of air for roasting is stopped. In the absence of air, copper (I) oxide formed above
reacts with remaining copper (I) sulphide to form copper metal and sulphur dioxide.

(d) An alloy is a homogeneous mixture of two or more metals (or a metal and small amounts
of non-metals).
Steel and Brass are examples of alloys.
(e) (i) Alloys are stronger than the metals from which they are made.
(ii) Alloys are harder than the constituent metals.
(iii) Alloys are more resistant to corrosion.
(iv) Alloys have lower melting points than constituent metals.
(v) Alloys have lower electrical conductivity than pure metals.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:195

Question 92:
An element A which is a part of common salt and kept under kerosene reacts with another
element B of atomic number 17 to give a product C. When an aqueous solution of product C is
electrolysed then a compound D is formed and two gases are liberated.
(a) What are A and B ?
(b) Identify C and D.
(c) What will be the action of C on litmus solution ? Why ?
(d) State whether element B is a solid, liquid or gas at room temperature.
(e) Write formula of the compound formed when element B reacts with an element E having
atomic number 5.
Solution :
(a) A is sodium and B is chlo rine
(b) C is sodium chloride and D is sodium hydroxide
(c) C will have no effect on litmus solution since it is neutral in nature.



(d) B is a gas at room temperature.
(e) EB 3

Question 93:
A metal which exists as a liquid at room temperature is obtained by heating its sulphide ore in
the presence of air.
(a) Name the metal and write its chemical symbol.
(b) Write the name and formula of the sulphide ore.
(c) Give the equations of chemical reactions involved in the production of metal from its
sulphide ore.
(d) Name a common device in which this metal is used.
(e) Can this metal displace copper from copper sulphate solution ? Why ?
Solution :
(a) Mercury, Hg
(b) Cinnabar, HgS

(d) Thermometer
(e) No; Because it is less reactive than copper.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:196

Question 94:
No chemical reaction takes place when granules of a rusty-brown solid A are mixed with the
powder of another solid B. However, when the mixture is heated, a reaction takes place
between its components. One of the products C is a metal and settles down in the molten
state while the other product D floats over it. It was observed that the reaction is highly
exothermic.
(a) What could the solids A and B be ?
(b) What are the products C and D most likely to be ?
(c) Write the chemical equation for the reaction between A and B leading to the formation of C
and D. Mention the physical sates of all the reactants and products in this equation and
indicate the heat change which takes place.
(d) What is the special name of such a reaction ? State one use of such a reaction.
(e) Name any two types of chemical reactions under which the above reaction can be
classified.
Solution :
(a) A is iron ( III ) oxide and B is aluminium powder.
(b) C is molten iron metal and D is aluminium oxide.

(d) This reaction is called thermite reaction. It is used for welding of broken pieces of heavy
iron objects like railway tracks, etc.
(e) Displacement reactions and oxidation-reduction reactions.

Question 95:
In an electrolytic tank, aluminium metal is being extracted by the electrolysis of molten
aluminium oxide using carbon electrodes. It is observed that one of the carbon electrodes is



gradually burnt away and has to be replaced.
(a) Which carbon electrode (cathode or anode) is burnt away ?
(b) Why is this carbon electrode burnt away ?
Solution :
(a) Positively charged carbon electrode (Anode)
(b) This carbon electrode is burnt away because oxygen produced during the electrolysis of
molten aluminium oxide reacts gradually with the carbon of carbon anode to form carbon
dioxide gas.

Question 96:
A metal X which is resistant to corrosion is produced by the electrolysis of its molten oxide
whereas another metal Y which is also resistant to corrosion is produced by the reduction of
its oxide with carbon. Metal X can be used in powder form in thermite welding whereas metal
Y is used in making cathodes of ordinary dry cells.
(a) Name the metals X and Y.
(b) Which of the two metals is more reactive : X or Y ?
(c) Name one ore or metal X. Also write its chemical formula.
(d) Name one ore of metal Y. Also write its chemical formula.
(e) Name one alloy of metal X and one alloy of metal Y.
Solution :
(a) X is aluminium and Y is zinc.
(b) X is more reactiv e than Y.
(c) Bauxite; Al 2 O 3 .2H2O
(d) Calamine, ZnCO 3
(e) Alloy of metal X : Duralumin ; Allo y of metal Y : Brass

Question 97:
When an object made of metal A is kept in air for a considerable time, it loses its shine and
becomes almost black due to the formation of a layer of substance B. When an object made
of another metal C is kept in damp air for a considerable time, it gets covered with a green
layer of substance D. Metal A is the best conductor of electricity whereas metal C is the next
best conductor of electricity.
(a) What is metal A ?
(b) What is metal C ?
(c) Name the substance B.
(d) Name the substance D.
What type of chemical can be used to remove the green layer from metal C and clean it ? Why
?
Solution :
(a) Silver
(b) Copper
(c) Silver sulphide
(d) Basic copper carbonate
(e) Dilute acid solution; The acid sol ution dissolves green coloured basic copper carbonate
present on the corroded copper object makes it look shiny, red brown again.

Question 98:
Four metals P, Q, R and S are all obtained by the reduction of their oxides with carbon. Metal P
is used to form a thin layer over the sheets of metal S to prevent its corrosion. Metal Q is used
for electroplating tiffin boxes made of metal S whereas metal R is used in making car
batteries. Metals Q and R form an alloy called solder. What are metals P, Q, R and S ? How
have you arrived at this conclusion ?



Solution :
Metal P is zinc; Metal Q is tin; Metal R is lead; Metal S is iron.
Metal P (zinc) is used to form a thin layer on metal S (iron) by the process of galvanisation to
prevent its corrosion.
Metal Q (tin) i s used for electroplating tiffin boxes made of metal S (iron).
Metal R (lead) is used in making car batteries.
Metals Q (tin) and R (lead) form an alloy called solder .

Question 99:
A black metal oxide XO2 is used as a catalyst in the preparation of oxygen gas from potassium
chlorate. The oxide XO2 is also used in ordinary dry cells. The metal oxide XO 2 cannot be
reduced satisfactorily with carbon to form metal X.
(a) Name the metal X.
(b) Name the metal oxide XO2
(c) Which reducing agent can be used to reduce XO2 to obtain metal X ?
(d) Name another metal which can also be extracted by the reduction of its oxide with the
above reducing agent.
Solution :
(a) Manganese
(b) Manganese dioxide
(c) Aluminium
(d) Chromium

Question 100:
Metals X and Y can be recovered from the anode mud left behind after the electrolytic refining
of copper metal. The coins made of metal X look new even after several years of use but the
coins made of metal Y lose their shine gradually and get blackened soon. When metal X is
alloyed with a small amount of metal Y, it becomes hard and hence suitable for making
ornaments. What are metals X and Y ? Also state the colour of metal X.
Solution :
Metal X is gold and Metal Y is silver; The colour of metal X (gold) is yellow.



Sources Of Energy

Question 1:
Name a non-renewable source of energy other than fossil fuels.
Solution :
Nuclear fuels (like uranium)

Question 2:
Define calorific value of a fuel.
Solution :
The amount of heat produced by burning 1 gram of a fuel completely is known as its calorific
value.

Question 3:
“The calorific value of cooking gas (LPG) is 50 kj/g”. What does it mean ?
Solution :
Calorific value of LPG is 50kJ/gm means that if 1 gram of LPG is burnt completely, then it will
produce 50kJ of heat energy.

Question 4:
Which of the following produces more heat (per unit mass) on burning ?
Coal or LPG
Solution :
LPG, due to its higher calorific value.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:122

Question 5:
Define ignition temperature of a fuel.
Solution :
Ignition temperature of fuel can be defined as the minimum temperature to which a fuel must
be heated so that it may catch fire and start burning.

Question 6:
“The ignition temperature of a fuel is 80°C”. What does this mean ?
Solution :
If ignition temp of a fuel is 80oC, this means that minimum 80oC is required for the ignition of
the fuel.



Question 7:
Fill in the following blank with a suitable word :
The amount of heat produced by burning a unit mass of a fuel completely is known as
its………………… value.
Solution :
calorific.

Question 8:
What is a source of energy ? What are the two main categories of the sources of energy ?
Solution :
A source of energy is one which can provide adequate amount of energy in a convenient form
over a long period of time.
Two main categories of the source of energy are:
i. Renewable source of energy
ii. Non- renewable source of energy

Question 9:
State any four characteristics of a good source of energy.
Solution :
A good source of energy is one:
(i) which would do a large amount of work per unit mass,
(ii) which is cheap and easily available,
(iii) which is easy to store and transport,
(iv) which is safe to handle and use.

Question 10:
What is meant by a non-renewable source of energy ? Give two examples of non-renewable
sources of energy.
Solution :
A non-renewable source of energy is defined as the source of energy which has accumulated
in nature over a very, very long time and cannot be quickly replaced when exhausted.
Ex. Coal, petroleum etc.

Question 11:
What is meant by a renewable source of energy ? Give two examples of renewable sources of
energy.
Solution :
A renewable source of energy is the one which is being produced continuously in nature and is
inexhaustible.
Ex. wind energy, ocean thermal energy etc.

Question 12:
What is the difference between a renewable and a non-renewable source of energy ? Explain
with examples.
Solution :
Renewable source of energy can be used again and again endlessly, where as non-renewable



source of energy cannot be renewed once used.
Ex. Renewable sources of energy are wind energy, ocean energy.
Non-renewable sources of energy are coal, fossil fuel.

Question 13:
Why are fossil fuels classified as non-renewable sources of energy ?
Solution :
Fossil fuels are known as non-renewable sources of energy because fossil fuels once used
cannot renewed or regained.

Question 14:
Name two sources of energy that you think are renewable. Give reason for your choice.
Solution :
Air and water, because both air and water can be used again and again endlessly, they never
get exhausted.

Question 15:
Name two sources of energy which you consider to be non-renewable. Give reason for your
choice.
Solution :
Petroleum and coal are non-renewable sources of energy because they cannot be used again
once exhausted.

Question 16:
(a) Classify the following into renewable and non-renewable sources of energy :
Coal, Wind, Tides, Petroleum, Wood, Natural gas
(b) What is the basis of above classification ?
Solution :
(a) Renewable source of energy – wind, tides, wood
Non- Renewable source of energy – coal, petroleum, natural gas
(b) The above classification is based on the fact that renewable sources are inexhaustible,
whereas non-renewable sources are exhaustible.

Question 17:
Coal is said to be formed from the wood of trees. Why then is coal considered to be a non-
renewable source of energy whereas wood is a renewable source of energy ?
Solution :
Coal is a non-renewable source of energy because it has accumulated in the earth over a very.
very long time, and if all the coal gets exhausted, it cannot be produced quickly in nature.
Wood is considered as a renewable source of energy because if trees are cut to obtain wood,
then more trees will grow in due course of time.

Question 18:
(a) What is a fuel ? Give five examples of fuels.
(b) What are the characteristics of an ideal fuel (or good fuel) ?
(c) The calorific value and ignition temperature of fuel A are 55 kj/g and 80°C, respectively.
These values for fuel B are 80 kj/g and 10°C, respectively. On burning, the fuel A produces C02
and H20 while the fuel B produces C02, CO and S02 . Give three points of relative advantages
and disadvantages of these two fuels.
Solution :
(a) The material which is burnt to produce heat energy is known as a fuel.
Ex. Wood, coal, LPG, kerosene, diesel etc.



(b) Characteristics of ideal fuel:
(i) It should have high calorific value.
(ii) It should burn without giving out any smoke or harmful gases.
(iii) It should have proper ignition temperature.
(iv) It should cheap and easily available.
(c) Fuel A:
i. Lower calorific value of 55 kJ/g (Disadvantage)
ii. Moderate ignition temperature of 80oC (Advantage)
iii. No harmful gases produced (Advantage)
Fuel B:
i. High calorific value of 80 kJ/g (Advantage)
ii. Very low ignition temperature of 10oC (Disadvantage)
iii. Harmgul gases like CO and SO2 produced (Disadvantage)

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:123

Question 30:
The calorific values of three fuels A, B and C are 33 kj/g, 48 kj/g and 150 kj/g, respectively. A is
solid, B is liquid and C is a gas at room temperature. On combustion, both A and B produce
carbon dioxide while C explodes forming steam. B and C leave no residue after combustion
while A leaves behind some solid residue. Which one of the three fuels is the most ideal ? Give
two reasons to support your answer.
Solution :
Fuel B is the most ideal fuel because.
(i) it leaves no residue on burning.
(ii) it has high calorific value of 48 kJ/g.
(iii) it does not burn explosively.

Question 31:
Calorific value and ignition temperature of fuel X are 75 kj/g and 20°C respectively. These
values for fuel Y are 50 kj/g and 75°C respectively. On burning, the fuel Y produces only C02
while fuel X produces C02 and CO. Which of the two is a better fuel ? Give two reasons to
support your answer.
Solution :
Fuel Y is a better fuel because
(i) it has a moderate ignition temperature of 75oC.
(ii) it produces no harmful gases like CO on burning.

Question 32:
The calorific values of five fuels A, B, C, D and E are given below :
A 48 kj/g
B 17 kj/g
C 150 kj/g
D 50 kj/g
E 30 kj/g
Which of the fuels could be : (i) cooking gas (ii) alcohol (iii) wood (iv) hydrogen (v) kerosene ?
Solution :
(i) cooking gas – D
(ii) alcohol – E
(iii) wood – B
(iv) hydrogen – C
(v) kerosene – A



Question 33:
Arrange the following fuels in the order of decreasing calorific values (keeping the fuel with
highest calorific value first) :
Biogas, Kerosene, Wood, Petrol, Hydrogen gas, Methane
Solution :
Hydrogen gas>Methane>Petrol>Kerosene>Biogas>Wood

Question 34:
Arrange the following fuels in the order of increasing calorific values (keeping the fuel with
lowest calorific value first) :
LPG, Coal, Alcohol, Dung cakes, Diesel
Solution :
Dung cakes<Coal<Alcohol<Diesel<LPG

Question 35:
Most of the fuels contain carbon as one of the constituents. Name a fuel which has very high
calorific value but does not contain carbon.
Solution :
Hydrogen gas.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:130

Question 1:
Name the product of petroleum that is used to drive heavy vehicles.
Solution :
Diesel.

Question 2:
Give one example of a good domestic fuel.
Solution :
LPG.

Question 3:
Name any one hydrocarbon fraction obtained during the fractional distillation of petroleum
which is used as a domestic fuel.
Solution :
Kerosene.

Question 4:
What are the various fuels which are used to generate electricity in a thermal power plant ?
Solution :
Coal, oil or gas.

Question 5:
Name any four fractions obtained from petroleum which are used as fuels.
Solution :
Fractions obtained from petroleum:
Diesel, petrol, kerosene, petroleum gas etc.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:131

Question 6:



What is the composition of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) ?
Solution :
LPG consists mainly of butane, alongwith smaller amounts of propane and ethane.

Question 7:
Which gaseous fuel is being used increasingly in transport vehicles like cars and buses these
days ?
Solution :
Compressed Natural Gas (CNG)

Question 8:
Write the full form of : (I) LPG, and (ii) CNG.
Solution :
(i) LPG-Liquified Petroleum Gas.
(ii) CNG-Compressed Natural Gas.

Question 9:
What is the main constituent of :
(i) petroleum gas ?
(ii) natural gas ?
Solution :
(i) Main constituent of petroleum gas is butane.
(ii) Main constituent of natural gas is methane.

Question 10:
Name the component which is found in natural gas as well as in biogas.
Solution :
Methane.

Question 11:
State two important uses of natural gas.
Solution :
Uses of natural gas:
(i) As a fuel in thermal power plants.
(ii) As a fuel in transport vehicles.

Question 12:
State one important use of CNG these days.
Solution :
CNG is used as a fuel in transport vehicles.

Question 13:
Complete the following sentence :
Domestic gas cylinders like Indane contain mainly………..
Solution :
butane.
Question 14:
Explain why, natural gas is considered to be a good fuel.
Solution :
Natural gas is considered to be a good fuel because it has a high calorific value, burns with a
smokeless flame, causes no air pollution and does not produce any poisonous gas.



Question 15:
What is meant by conventional sources of energy ? Write the names of two conventional
sources of energy.
Solution :
The traditional sources of energy which are familiar to most people are called conventional
source of energy.
Ex. Wood, coal etc.

Question 16:
Explain the principle of working of a thermal power plant. Draw a labelled diagram to illustrate
your answer.
Solution :
In a thermal power plant, heat produced by burning coal is used to boil water to form steam.
The steam, at high temperature and pressure, rotates the turbine and its shaft, which drives
the generator to produce electricity.

Question 17:
What are the disadvantages of burning fossil fuels ?
Solution :
Disadvantages of burning the fossil fuels are:
(i) The burning of fossil fuels produce acidic gases.
(ii) The burning of fossil fuels produce large amount of CO2 gas, which increases greenhouse
effect.
(iii) The burning of fossil fuels produce smoke and leaves behind a lot of ash.

Question 18:
Write a short note on the pollution caused by burning fossil fuels.
Solution :
Burning of fossil fuels leads to the production of many acidic gases like sulphur-dioxide and
nitrogen dioxides. These gases causes acid rain which damages trees, plants and buildings,
reduces fertility of soil, and poses danger to aquatic life. The burning of fossil fuels puts a
poisonous gas carbon monoxide in air. It also produces large amount of CO2 gas which
damages the environment in the long run by increasing the greenhouse effect. Also, burning of
fossil fuels produces smoke and a lot of ash.

Question 19:
What are the various steps which can be taken to control (or reduce) pollution caused by



burning fossil fuels ?
Solution :
Pollution caused by the burning of fossil fuels can be controlled by the increasing the
efficiency of combustion process and by using various techniques to reduce the escape of
harmful gases and ash into the surrounding air.

Question 20:
If you could use any source of energy for heating your food, which one would you use and why
?
Solution :
We will use LPG due to its high calorific value and smokeless flame.

Question 21:
Why is LPG considered a good fuel ?
Solution :
LPG is considered as good fuel because it has a high calorific value gives a smokeless flame.

Question 22:
Why is LPG considered a better fuel than coal ?
Solution :
LPG is considered as a better fuel than coal because it has a higher calorific value, while
burning it does not produce any smoke.

Question 23:
Why is the leakage of LPG detected easily although it is odourless ? State the steps to be taken
in case its leakage is detected in the kitchen.
Solution :
For the detection of leakage, a foul smelling substance called ethyl mercaptan is added to the
LPG.
In case of LPG leakage in the kitchen, following steps must be taken:
1. The door and windows should be opened at once to allow the gas to escape.
2. The source of gas leakage should be checked and then set right with the help of a gas
mechanic.

Question 24:
(a) What are fossil fuels ? Give three examples of fossil fuels.
(b) Describe how fossil fuels were formed.
(c) Explain how, sun is considered to be the ultimate source of fossil fuels.
(d) Which fossil fuels were formed by the buried remains of small plants and animals ?
(e) Which fossil fuel was formed by the buried remains of large land plants ?
Solution :
(a) Natural fuels formed deep under the earth from the pre-historic remains of the organisms
(like plants and animals) are called fossil fuels.
Ex. Coal, petroleum and natural gas.
(b) The plants and animals which died millions of years ago and got buried deep in the earth,
away from the reach of oxygen, got converted into fossil fuels due to the chemical effects of
pressure, heat and bacteria.
(c) Sun is considered to be the ultimate source of fossil fuels because it was the sunlight of
long ago that made plants grow and the animals which got buried in the earth also ate plants.
So, plants and animals which were originally made by sun’s energy only have been converted
into fossil fuels.
(d) Petroleum and natural gas.



(e) Coal.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:132

Question 37:
Fossil fuels are energy rich compounds of an element X which were originally made by the
plants with the help of sun’s energy.
(a) Name the element X.
(b) Name another element which is usually found in combination with X in fossil fuels.
Solution :
(a) X = Carbon
(b) Another element which is usually found in combination with carbon in fossil fuels is
hydrogen.

Question 38:
The energy in petrol originally came from the sun. Explain how it got into petrol.
Solution :
Petrol is obtained from petroleum, which is a fossil fuel. Fossil fuels were originally made by
sun’s energy because it was the sunlight of long ago that made plants and animals grow. So,
the energy in petrol originally came from the sun.

Question 39:
A substance X is added to LPG cylinders while filling so as to make the detection of leakage of
LPG from the cylinders easy.
(a) Name the substance X.
(b) How does substance X make the detection of leakage of LPG easy ?
Solution :
(a) X is ethyl mercaptan
(b) Ethyl mercaptan has a foul smell that can be detected easily.

Question 40:
The pollution of air caused by burning petroleum fuels (like petrol and diesel) in vehicles can be
controlled by fitting a device X in the exhaust system of vehicles.
(a) Name the device X.
(b) How does this device help in controlling air pollution ?
Solution :
(a) Catalytic converter
(b) It converts poisonous carbon monoxide into non-poisonous carbon dioxide and harmful
nitrogen oxides into harmless nitrogen gas.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:140

Question 1:
A hydro-power plant converts one form of energy into another. Name the two forms of energy.
Solution :
Potential energy into electrical energy.

Question 2:
What type of energy is possessed by flowing water ?
Solution :
Kinetic energy.



Question 3:
Flowing water can rotate a turbine. Which type of energy is used up by the turbine ?
Solution :
Kinetic energy of water.

Question 4:

Name the original source of wind energy.
Solution :
Sun.

Question 5:
What should be the minimum wind speed for the satisfactory working of a wind-powered
electric generator ?
Solution :
15 km/hr.

Question 6:
Write one use of wind energy (a) in the past (b) at present.
Solution :
Use of wind energy
(a) in the past – in flour mills
(b) at present – for generating the electricity through wind-powered generators.

Question 7:
Why is the copper tube of a solar water heater painted black from outside ?
Solution :
Copper tube of solar water heater is painted black because black colour is good absorber of
heat.

Question 8:
What type of reactions occurring inside the sun produce solar energy ?
Solution :
Nuclear fusion.

Question 9:
Name some of the solar energy devices.
Solution :
Solar water heater.
Solar cooker.
Solar cell.

Question 10:
What type of reflector is used in a box-type solar cooker ?
Solution :
Plane mirror reflector.

Question 11:
What is the range of temperature which can be achieved in a box-type solar cooker in two to
three hours ?
Solution :
About 1000C to 1400C



Question 12:
Name the device which converts sunlight into electricity.
Solution :
Solar cell.

Question 13:
How much solar energy will be received by 1 m2 area in one hour if the solar constant be 1.4
kW/m2 ?
Solution :
Solar constant is 1.4kW/m2 or 1.4 kJ/s/m2.
Solar energy received by 1 m2 area in 1 s = 1.4 kJ
Solar energy received by 1 m2 area in one hour (or 3600 s) = 1.4 x 3600 = 5040 kJ

Question 14:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
A solar cell converts………. energy into…………. energy.
Solution :
sunlight; electrical.

Question 15:
(a) What is the difference between a thermal power plant and a hydro power plant ?
(b) Which of the two causes serious air pollution and how ?
Solution :
(a) Difference between thermal power plant and hydro power plant:
Thermal power plant uses non-renewable sources of energy like coal, oil or gas; whereas hydro
power plant uses renewable source of energy i.e. water.
Thermal power plant causes pollution due to the burning of fossil fuels; whereas hydro power
plant is environment friendly.
(b) Thermal power plant causes serious air pollution because it emits harmful gases and fly-
ash into the air.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:141

Question 16:
Compare the sun and the fossil fuels as the sources of energy.
Solution :
Sun is a renewable source of energy, where as fossil fuels are non-renewable sources of
energy.

Question 17:
What kind of mirror, concave, convex or plane, would be best suited for use in a solar cooker ?
Why ?
Solution :
Concave and plane mirrors are used for making solar cooker because concave mirror
converges a large amount of sun’s rays at a point that is required for high heating and plane
mirror reflects the rays of light in the form of a strong beam of sunlight on the top of the box
that is required for moderate heating.

Question 18:
(a) Name that part of a box-type solar cooker which allows the sun’s heat rays to enter the box
but does not
allow inside heat to go out.



(b) Explain why, a plane mirror reflector is used in a box-type solar cooker.
Solution :
(a) Glass sheet cover
(b) A plane mirror reflector is used in a box type solar cooker so as to get a strong beam of
sunlight after reflection from the mirror.

Question 19:
What are the advantages and disadvantages of using a solar cooker ?
Solution :
(a) Advantages of using solar cooker
(i) It saves precious fules like coal, kerosene etc.
(ii) It does not produce any smoke or ash.
(iii) The food cooked in a solar cooker has all its nutrients intact.
(b) Disadvantages of using solar cooker
(i) Solar cooker cannot be used during night time.
(ii) If the day-sky is covered with clouds, it will not be possible to cook the food using solar
cooker.
(iii) Direction of reflector has to be changed from time to time to keep it facing the sun.

Question 20:
(a) What is a solar cell ? Draw the labelled diagram of a solar cell.
(b) Name the semi-conductor material which is usually used for making solar cells.
(c) Write the uses of solar cells.
Solution :
(a) Solar cell is a device which converts solar energy directly into electrical energy.

(b) Silicon
(c) Use of solar cell:
i. To provide electricity in artificial satellites and space probes.
ii. To provide electricity to remote areas where normal electricity transmission lines do not
exist.
iii. To provide electricity to light houses
iv. To operate traffic signals, watches, calculators and toys.

Question 21:
State the advantages and disadvantages of using solar cells.
Solution :
(a) Advantage of solar cell
(i) They have no moving parts and require no maintenance.



(ii) They can be set up in remote and inaccessible areas
(b) Disadvantage of solar cell
(i) They are very expensive.
(ii) They are less efficient. They can convert only about 25 % of light falling on them into
electricity.
(iii) They cannot work during night time.

Question 22:
What is a solar cell panel ? For what purpose is it used ? State its two main advantages.
Solution :
Solar cell panel consists of a large number of solar cells joined together in a definite pattern. It
is used to convert solar energy into electricity.
Advantages of solar cell panel are:-
1. It provides much more electric power than a single solar cell.
2. It is used to provide electricity in remote and inaccessible rural areas.

Question 23:
(a) What is solar constant ? What is the value of solar constant ?
(b) If the energy received by 5 m2 area in 10 minutes is 4200 kj, calculate the value of solar
constant.
Solution :
(a) The amount of solar energy received per second by one metre square area of the near earth
space (exposed perpendicularly to the sun rays) at an average distance between the sun and
the earth, is known as solar constant. Its value is 1.4 kJ/s/m2.
(b) Area, A=5m2; time,t=10 min=600sec; E=4200 kJ.
Solar constant =E/(Axt)
=4200/(5×600)
=1.4 kJ/s/m2

Question 24:
How has the traditional use of energy of flowing water been modified for our convenience ?
Solution :
Traditionally, the energy of flowing water has been used for rotating the water-wheels and for
driving water-mills to grind wheat to make flour. The traditional use of energy of flowing water
has been modified by improvements in technology and it is now used to generate electricity.

Question 25:
How has the traditional use of wind energy been modified for our convenience ?
Solution :
Traditionally, wind energy was used through windmills to pump water from a well and to grind
wheat into flour. But the traditional use has been modified and now it is used for the
generation of electricity.

Question 26:
(a) What is hydroelectricity ? Explain the basic principle of generation of hydroelectricity with
the help of a
labelled diagram.
(b) State two advantages of producing hydroelectricity.
(c) State two disadvantages of producing hydroelectricity.
Solution :
(a) The electricity generated from hydro power plant is known as hydro electricity.
Water is collected in a reservoir at a height, so the water has potential energy stored in it. When



the water flows down through this large height, its potential energy gets converted into kinetic
energy. The fast flowing water rotates the turbine which is connected to generator through its
shaft. The generator produces electricity.

(b) Advantage of producing hydroelectricity:
(i) It does not cause any environmental pollution.
(ii) It uses the energy of flowing water, which is a renewable source of energy
(c) Disadvantage of producing hydroelectricity
(i) Large areas of land are required.
(ii) Large eco-systems get destroyed.

Question 27:
(a) With the help of a labelled diagram, explain the construction and working of a solar cooker.
(b) Why is the solar cooker box painted black from inside ?
(c) Why is the solar cooker box covered with a glass sheet ?
Solution :
(a) Construction and working of solar cooker
A solar cooker consists of an insulated metal box or wooden box which is painted all black
from inside. There is a thick glass sheet cover over the box and a plane mirror reflector is also
attached to the box.
The food to be cooked is put in metal containers which are painted black from outside. These
metal containers are then placed inside the solar cooker box covered with the glass
sheet. The sun’s rays fall on the reflector, get reflected into the box through the upper glass
and get trapped within it.

(b) Solar cooker inner body is painted black because black color is a good absorber of heat, so
it traps the maximum rays from the sun.
(c) Solar cooker is covered with a glass sheet so as to trap the heat rays in the interior of the
box of the cooker.

Question 28:
(a) What is wind ? What type of energy is possessed by wind ?



(b) Explain how, wind energy can be used to generate electricity. Illustrate your answer with the
help of a labelled diagram.
(c) State two advantages of using wind energy for generating electricity.
(d) Mention two limitations of wind energy for generating electricity
Solution :
(a) Moving air is known as wind. Wind posses kinetic energy.
(b) The fast moving wind strikes the wind turbine which starts rotating. The shaft of the wind
turbine also rotates and drives the generator which produces electricity.

(c) Advantages of using wind energy for generating electricity:
(i) It does not cause any pollution.
(ii) It is available free of cost.
(d) Limitations of wind energy:
(i) Wind energy farms cannot be established everywhere. They can be established only at
those places where wind blows for most part of the year.
(ii) Wind energy farms require large area of land for their establishment.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:142

Question 39:
A large coal-fired power station produces 2000 MW of electrical energy. A wind turbine with 33
m blades can produce 300 kW.
(a) How many turbines would be needed to replace the power station ?
(b) Why, in actual practice, this number of turbines could not replace the coal-fired power
station ?
Solution :
(a) Electrical energy produced by coal-fired plant = 2000MW = 2000x106W
Electrical energy produced by wind turbine = 300kW = 300x103W
No. of wind turbine required = 2000×106/300×103 = 6666.6
So, 6667 wind turbines would be needed to replace the power station.
(b) In actual practice, this no. of wind turbines could not replace the coal-fired power plant
because the efficiency of wind turbines keeps changing due to changes in wind speed but the
efficiency of steam turbines used in coal-fired power stations remains the same.

Question 40:
In a solar water heater, why is the storage tank placed at a higher level than the solar panel
containing coils ?
Solution :
This is because hot water, being lighter and less denser, rises to the top.

Question 41:
In many applications, solar cells are connected to rechargeable batteries. Why is this so ?



Solution :
The electricity made by the solar cells during day time is stored in rechargeable batteries so
that it can be used later on, for example, at night.

Question 42:
(a) Solar cells are used to provide the electric current to charge the batteries of a car driven by
an electric
motor. Describe the energy changes which take place.
(b) What differences would you expect in the charging of car batteries (i) in bright sunlight (ii)
on a cloudy day (iii) at night ?
Solution :
(a) Solar cells convert solar energy into electrical energy.
While charging the batteries, electrical energy is converted into chemical energy.
During the use of batteries, chemical energy is converted into electrical energy; then electric
motor converts electrical energy into kinetic energy (which drives the car).
(b) (i) Batteries are charged quickly.
(ii) Batteries are charged very slowly.
(iii) Batteries are not charged at all.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:148

Question 1:
What substance is obtained as a residue when wood is burned in a limited supply of air ?
Solution :
Charcoal.

Question 2:
Name one source of energy which is not derived from solar energy directly or indirectly.
Solution :
Geothermal energy.

Question 3:
What name is given to the heat energy obtained from hot rocks inside the earth ?
Solution :
Geothermal energy.

Question 4:
Name the agent which decomposes animal dung into biogas.
Solution :
Anaerobic bacteria.

Question 5:
Which component of biogas is used as a fuel ?
Solution :
Methane.

Question 6:
Name the constitutents of biogas.
Solution :
Bio gas consists of methane, carbon dioxide, hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide.

Question 7:



Which of the following is needed for the formation of biogas from cow-dung and which not ?
Water, Oxygen
Solution :
Needed:- water.
Not needed:- oxygen.

Question 8:
Name the clean fuel which can be obtained from cow-dung.
Solution :
Biogas.

Question 9:
Apart from cattle dung, what other substances can be added to a biogas plant ?
Solution :
Apart from cattle dung, human excreta, agriculture wastes, vegetable wastes, poultry
droppings, paper scrap etc. can also be added to a biogas plant.

Question 10:
Name any three forms of energy which could be harnessed from the sea.
Solution :
Three forms of energy which could be harnessed from the sea are:
(i) Tidal energy
(ii) Wave energy
(iii) Ocean thermal energy.

Question 11:
Write two forms in which solar energy manifests itself in sea.
Solution :
(i) Sea-waves energy.
(ii) Ocean thermal energy.

Question 12:
Write the full form of OTE.
Solution :
OTE stands for Ocean Thermal Energy.

Question 13:
What is the function of anaerobic micro-organisms such as anaerobic bacteria in a biogas
plant ?
Solution :
Anaerobic bacteria help in the degradation of cow-dung in the presence of water but in the
absence of oxygen.

Question 14:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Tidal energy is one of the forms in which solar energy manifests itself in oceans.
Solution :
False

Question 15:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Biomass is another form in which……… energy manifests itself.



(b) Tidal waves build up and recede……….. a day.
Solution :
(a) solar.
(b) twice.

Question 16:
(a) What is biomass ? Give three examples of biomass.
(b) Name the biomass which is still widely used as a source of heat energy in many
households of our country.
Solution :
(a) The dead parts of plants and trees, and the waste material of animals are called biomass. It
is the organic matter which is used as a fuel to produce energy. E.g., wood, agricultural wastes
and cow dung.
(b) Wood.

Question 17:
What are the two ways in which cow-dung can be used as a fuel ? Which of them is better and
why ?
Solution :
Two ways in which cow-dung can be used as a fuel are:
1. In the form of cow-dung cakes, which can be used directly as a fuel.
2. By preparing biogas from cow-dung.
Biogas is better than cow-dung cakes because it gives a cleaner than cow-dung cakes and
after extracting biogas, the spent cow-dung can be used as a manure.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:149

Question 18:
How is charcoal prepared ? Explain why, charcoal is a better fuel than wood.
Solution :
Charcoal is prepared by burning wood in a limited supply of air, so that water and other volatile
materials present in it get removed.
Charcoal is a better fuel than wood because it has a higher calorific value than wood, and it
burns without producing smoke wheras wood produces a lot of smoke on burning.

Question 19:
Compare and contrast biomass and hydroelectricity as sources of energy.
Solution :
(i) Biomass is a renewable source of energy and hydroelectricity is also a renewable source of
energy.
(ii) The use of biomass by burning causes air pollution but the use of hydroelectricity does not
cause any pollution.
(iii) Biomass gives heat energy which can be used for cooking and heating only. On the other
hand, hydroelectricity can run all types of electricical appliances.
(iv) Biomass energy can be obtained without using any special device but hydroelectricity can
be produced only by establishing hydro-power plants.

Question 20:
Why is biogas considered an ideal fuel for domestic use ?
Solution :
Biogas is considered an ideal fuel for domestic use because:
(a) Biogas burns without smoke and hence does not cause air pollution.



(b) Biogas has a high calorific value. That is, biogas produces a large amount of heat per unit
mass.
(c) Biogas is cheaper than most common fuels.
(d) Biogas is a clean fuel since it burns completely without leaving any residue behind.

Question 21:
(a) Explain how tidal energy can be used to generate electricity.
(b) Why is tidal energy not likely to be a potential source of energy ?
Solution :

During high tide, when the level of water in the sea is high, sea-water flows into the reservoir of
the barrage and turns the turbines. The turbines then turn the generator to produce the
electricity. And during the low tide, when the level of sea-water is low, the sea-water stored in
the barrage reservoir is allowed to flow out into the sea. This flowing water also turns the
turbines and generates electricity.
(b) Tidal energy is not likely to be a potential source of energy because there are very few sites
around the world which are suitable for building tidal barrages, and the rise and fall of sea-
water during high and low tides is not enough to generate electricity on a large scale.

Question 22:
State two ways in which the energy of sea-waves can be harnessed.
Solution :
Sea-waves energy can be harnessed by by the following ways:
1. By setting up floating generators in the sea which would move up and down with the sea-
waves and their movement would drive the generators to produce electricity.
2. By letting the sea-waves move up and down inside large tubes so that when the waves
move up, the air in the tubes is compressed and this compressed air can then be used to turn
a turbine of a generator to produce electricity.

Question 23:
What is meant by ocean thermal energy ? Explain how ocean thermal energy can be used to
generate electricity.
Solution :
The energy available due to the difference in the temperature of water at the upper surface
and the deeper layers of ocean is known as ocean thermal energy.
Ocean thermal energy is used to generate electricity in an Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
power plant (OTEC power plant). A temperature difference of 20oC or more between the
surface water and deeper water is needed for the operation of these plants. The warm surface
water of ocean is used to boil a liquid like ammonia or chlorofluorocarbon. The high pressure
of liquid vapours is used to turn the turbine of a generator and produce electricity.

Question 24:
What are the limitations of energy that can be harnessed from the sea ?



Solution :
Limitations of energy that can be harnessed from the sea:
1. There are very few sites around the world which are suitable for building tidal barrage for
harnessing tidal energy. Moreover, the rise and fall of sea-water during high and low tides is
not enough to generate electricity on a large scale.
2. The harnessing of sea-waves energy is a viable proposition only at those places where sea-
waves are very strong.
3. Though the energy potential from the sea is very large but its large scale exploitation is
difficult at the moment.

Question 25:
Suggest a safe and efficient method for the disposal of biowastes and sewage materials. How
is this method advantageous to us ?
Solution :
A safe and efficient method for the disposal of biowastes and sewage materials is to utilise
them for producing biogas. This method is advantageous to us for getting energy and manure
without polluting the environment.

Question 26:
Which of the following sources of energy are not derived from the sun ?
Biomass, Wind, Ocean thermal energy, Geothermal energy, Nuclear fuels, Hydroelectricity,
Wave energy, Coal, Petroleum, Tidal energy
Solution :
Following sources of energy are not derived from the sun:
Geothermal energy, nuclear fuels, tidal energy.

Question 27:
(a) What is biogas ? Name the major component of biogas.
(b) What are the raw materials used for making biogas ?
(c) Describe the construction and working of a biogas plant with the help of a labelled diagram.
(d) Write any two uses of biogas.
(e) Write any two advantages of using biogas.
Solution :
(a) Biogas is a mixture of gases produced by anaerobic degradation of biomass in the
presence of water but in the absence of oxygen. Methane is the major component of biogas.
(b) Cow-dung and water.
(c) Construction and working of biogas plant:

A biogas plant consists of a wall-shaped, underground tank called digester, which is made of
bricks, and has a dome shaped roof D. The dome acts as a gas-holder. There is a gas outlet S
at the top of the dome having a valve V. There is a sloping inlet chamber I connected to a
mixing tank M and a rectangular outlet chamber O connected to the overflow tank F.



Cow dung and water are mixed in equal proportions in the mixing tank M to prepare the slurry.
This slurry is fed into the digester tank through the inlet chamber I to fill the tank upto the
cylindrical level. Then, the cow-dung undergoes anaerobic degradation with the evolution of
biogas which collects in the dome. The pressure of biogas on the slurry forces the spent slurry
to go into the overflow tank F through outlet chamber O, from where it is removed.
(d) Two uses of bio gas:
(i) For cooking purpose
(ii) For lightning purpose
(e) Two advantages of biogas:
(i) Smoke-free cooking
(ii) High calorific value

Question 28:
(a) What is geothermal energy ?
(b) What is the source of heat contained in geothermal energy ?
(c) Explain how, geothermal energy is used to generate electricity.
(d) State two advantages of geothermal energy.
(e) State two disadvantages of geothermal energy.
Solution :
(a) Geothermal energy is the heat energy from hot rocks present inside the earth.
(b) Hot rocks present inside the earth are the source of heat contained in geothermal energy.
(c) Extremely hot rocks present below the surface of earth heat the underground water and
turn it into steam. As more and more steam is formed between the rocks, it gets compressed
to high pressures. This high pressure steam is brought up through pipes and is used to run
the turbine of a generator to produce electricity.
(d) Advantage of geothermal energy:
(i) It is very economical to use.
(ii) It does not cause any pollution.
(e) Disadvantage of geo thermal energy:-
(i) It is not available everywhere.
(ii) Deep drilling in the earth is required, which is technically very difficult and expensive.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:150

Question 42:
A certain form of energy is available due to the difference in the temperature of water at the
surface of the ocean and its deeper levels.
(a) Name the form of energy.
(b) Is this energy ultimately derived from the sun or not ?
(c) Explain how this form of energy can be converted into electricity.
(d) What is the minimum temperature difference in water at the surface of ocean and its
deeper level which is required to operate power plants based on this energy ?
Solution :
(a) Ocean thermal energy
(b) No
(c) Ocean thermal energy is used to generate electricity in an Ocean Thermal Energy
Conversion power plant (OTEC power plant). A temperature difference of 20oC or more
between the surface water and deeper water is needed for the operation of these plants. The
warm surface water of ocean is used to boil a liquid like ammonia or chlorofluorocarbon. The
high pressure of liquid vapours is used to turn the turbine of a generator and produce
electricity.
(d) 200C



Question 43:
(a) The gravitational pull of the moon causes the sea-water to rise periodically.
(b) What name is given to the condition of the sea when its water is raised ?
(c) What name is given to the condition of the sea when its raised water recedes ?
(d) What name is given to the energy which can be harnessed from this natural phenomenon ?
(e) Draw labelled diagram to show how this energy can be harnessed to generate electricity.
Solution :
(a) High tide
(b) Low tide
(c) Tidal energy
(d)

Question 44:
When the material A mined from the earth is heated strongly in an insufficeint supply of air, it
produces a solid fuel B which consists mainly of carbon. When another material C obtained
from trees is heated in an insufficient supply of air, it produces another solid fuel D which also
consists mainly of carbon. Name A, B, C and D.
Solution :
A is coal; B is coke; C is wood; D is charcoal

Question 45:
A certain form of energy which is not sourced directly or indirectly from the sun and does not
cause any pollution is very easily converted into electricity. This form of energy is, however,
not available everywhere. Moreover, it is technically very difficult and expensive to obtain it.
Name the form of energy.
Solution :
Geothermal energy.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:156

Question 1:
What type of nuclear reaction is responsible for the liberation of energy :
(a) in a nuclear reactor ?
(b) in the sun ?
Solution :
(a) Nuclear fission
(b) Nuclear fusion

Question 2:
Which product of the nuclear fission of uranium-235 is utilised to cause further fission of its
nuclei ?
Solution :



Neutrons.

Question 3:
Which particles bring about the fission of uranium-235 ?
Solution :
Neutrons.

Question 4:
State whether the fission of uranium-235 is caused by low energy neutrons or high energy
neutrons.
Solution :
By the low energy neutrons.

Question 5:
Name the type of nuclear reaction which is involved in the working of:
(a) a hydrogen bomb.
(b) an atom bomb.
Solution :
(a) Nuclear fusion.
(b) Nuclear fission.

Question 6:
Name the moderator used in a nuclear reactor.
Solution :
Graphite.

Question 7:
Of what material are the control rods of a nuclear reactor made ?
Solution :
Boron.

Question 8:
What do you think is the purpose of the thick, concrete chamber surrounding the reactor of a
nuclear power plant ?
Solution :
Thick concrete chamber is required to prevent the radioactive rays to travel outside.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:157

Question 9:
Where, in a nuclear power station, is uranium, used up ?
Solution :
Uranium is used up in the reactor.

Question 10:
State one use of nuclear fission reactions.
Solution :
Nuclear fission reactions are used for generating electricity at a nuclear power plant.

Question 11:
Name the unit which is commonly used for expressing the energy released in nuclear
reactions.



Solution :
Million electron volt (MeV)

Question 12:
How many MeV are equivalent to 1 atomic mass unit (u) ?
Solution :
1 atomic mass unit=931 MeV

Question 13:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Splitting of a heavy nucleus into two lighter nuclei is called…………
(b) Uranium-235 atoms will split when hit by……… This is called……………….
(c) Nuclear………. is used in nuclear power stations for the production of electricity.
(d) In a nuclear power station, nuclear fission takes place in the…………
Solution :
(a) nuclear fission
(b) neutrons; nuclear fission
(c) fission
(d) reactor

Question 14:
What is nuclear fission ? Explain with an example. Write the equation of the nuclear reaction
involved.
Solution :
The process in which the heavy nucleus of a radioactive atom(such as uranium) splits up into
smaller nuclei when bombarded with low energy neutrons, is called nuclear fission.
E.g., When uranium-235 atoms are bombarded with slow moving neutrons, the heavy uranium
nucleus breaks up to produce two medium-weighted atoms and 3 neutrons, with the emission
of tremendous amount of energy.

Question 15:
(a) What is nuclear fusion ? Explain with an example. Write the equation of the reaction
involved.
(b) Why are very high temperatures required for fusion to occur ?
Solution :
(a) The process in which two nuclei of light elements (like that of hydrogen) combine to form a
heavy nucleus (like that of helium), is called nuclear fusion.
When deuterium atoms are heated to an extremely high temperature under extremely high
pressure, then two deuterium nuclei combine together to form a heavy nucleus of helium, and
a neutron is emitted. A tremendous amount of energy is liberated in the process.

(b) Because very high energy is required to force the lighter nuclei (which repel each other) to
fuse together to form a bigger nuclei.

Question 16:
What is the nuclear fuel in the sun ? Describe the process by which energy is released in the
sun. Write the equation of the nuclear reaction involved.
Solution :
The nuclear fuel in the sun is hydrogen gas.



The sun can be considered as a big thermonuclear furnace where hydrogen atoms
continuously get fused into helium atoms. Mass gets lost during these fusion reactions and
energy is being produced.
Nuclear reaction:

Question 17:
(a) Write Einstein’s mass-energy equation. Give the meaning of each symbol which occurs in it.
(b) If 25 atomic mass units (u) of a radioactive material are destroyed in a nuclear reaction,
how much energy is released in MeV ?
Solution :
(a) Einstein’s equation: E=mc2

where E is the amount of energy produced if mass m is destroyed, and c is the speed of light
in vacuum.
(b) 1 atomic mass unit = 931 MeV
25 atomic mass unit = 931 x 25 MeV = 23275 MeV
23275 MeV of energy is released.

Question 18:
(a) What is the source of energy of ths sun and other stars ?
(b) Describe the working of a hydrogen bomb.
(c) What is common between the sun and a hydrogen bomb ?
Solution :
(a) Nuclear fusion reactions 0f hydrogen.
(b) The hydrogen bomb consists of heavy isotopes of hydrogen (deuterium and tritium)
alongwith lithium-6. The explosion of hydrogen bomb is done by using an atom bomb. When
the aton bomb is exploded, its fission reaction produces a lot of heat which raises the
temperature of deuterium and tritium to 107oC in a few microseconds. Then fusion reactions
of deuterium and tritium take place producing a tremendous amount of energy. This explodes
the hydrogen bomb. Lithium-6 is used to produce more tritium needed for fusion.
(c) The source of energy is same for both the sun and the hydrogen atom, i.e. nuclear fusion.

Question 19:
(a) What will happen if slow moving neutrons are made to strike the atoms of a heavy element

235
92U  ? What
is the name of this process ?
(b) Write a nuclear equation to represent the process which takes place.
(c) Name one installation where such a process is utilised.
Solution :
(a) When slow moving neutrons are made to strike the atoms of a heavy element uranium-
235, the heavy uranium nucleus breaks up to produce two medium-weighted atoms and 3
neutrons, with the emission of tremendous amount of energy. This process is called nuclear
fission.

(c) Nuclear Power Station

Question 20:
(a) What are the advantages of nuclear energy ?



(b) State the disadvantages of nuclear energy.
Solution :
(a) Advantages of nuclear energy:
(i) It produces a large amount of useful energy from a very small amount of a nuclear fuel.
(ii) Once the nuclear fuel is loaded into the reactor, the nuclear power plant can go on
producing electricity for two to three years at a stretch. There is no need of feeding the fuel
again and again.
(iii) It does not produce gases like CO2 or SO2.
(b) Disadvantages of nuclear energy:
(i) The waste products of nuclear fission reactions are radioactive which keep on emitting
harmful radiations for thousands of years and are difficult to store or dispose safely.
(ii) Very high cost of installation is required.
(iii) There is a limited availability of uranium fuel.

Question 21:
The following questions are about the nuclear reactor of a power plant.
(a) Which isotope of uranium produces the energy in the fuel rods ?
(b) Will the fuel rods last for ever ?
(c) Is the energy produced by nuclear fission or nuclear fusion ?
(d) What is the purpose of using the graphite moderator ?
(e) What is the function of boron rods in the nuclear reactor ?
(f) Why is liquid sodium (or carbon dioxide gas) pumped through the reactor ?
Solution :
(a) Uranium-235
(b) No
(c) Nuclear fission
(d) Moderator slows down the speed of neutrons to make them fit for causing fission.
(e) Boron rods are used to absorb excess neutrons and prevent the fission reaction from going
out of control.
(f) Liquid sodium or carbon dioxide gas is used as a ‘coolant’ to transfer the heat produced to
heat exchanger for converting water into steam.

Question 22:
In the reactor of a nuclear power plant, name the material which is used :
(a) as a moderator
(b) to absorb radiations
(c) in the fuel rods
(d) in the control rods
(e) to carry away heat
Solution :
(a) Graphite
(b) Concrete
(c) Uranium-235
(d) Boron
(e) Liquid sodium

Question 23:
In the nuclear reactor of a power plant:
(a) how do control rods control the rate of fission ?
(b) how is heat removed from the reactor core, and what use is made of this heat ?
Solution :
(a) Control rods control the rate of fission by absorbing the excess neutrons and preventing



the fission reaction from going out of control.
(b) Heat is removed from the nuclear reactor core with the help of liquid sodium, which
absorbs the heat and transfers it to the heat exhanger. This heat is used for converting water
in the heat exchanger into steam, which is then used to produce electricity by rotating a turbine
and its shaft connected to a generator.

Question 24:
How does inserting the control rods in the graphite core affect the fission in the reactor ?
Explain your answer.
Solution :
On inserting the control rods in the graphite core, the rods start absorbing the excess neutrons
and maintain the rate of reaction as per requirement. The rods can be raised or lowered in the
reactor from outside. The part which is inside the reactor absorbs neutrons.

Question 25:
What are the advantages and disadvantages of using nuclear fuel for generating electricity ?
Solution :
Advantages of using nuclear fuel: Electricity can be produced for almost two to three years
with the same uranium fuel in a nuclear power plant.
Disadvantages of using nuclear fuel: The nuclear wastes produced by the fission of uranium-
235 during the generation of electricity are radioactive and extremely harmful.

Question 26:
(a) What is a nuclear reactor ? What is the fuel used in a nuclear reactor ?
(b) With the help of a labelled diagram, describe the working of a nuclear power plant.
(c) How is the working nuclear reactor of a power plant shut down in an emergency ?
(d) Name five places in India where nuclear power plants are located.
Solution :
(a) Nuclear reactor is a device designed to maintain a chain reaction producing a steady flow
of neutrons generated by the fission of heavy nuclei. Uranium-235 is used as a fuel in a nuclear
reactor.

In a nuclear power plant, the fission of uranium-235 is carried out in a reactor R. Uranium-235
rods are inserted in a graphite core which acts as a moderator to slow down the neutrons.
Boron rods B absorb excess neutrons and controls the rate of reaction. Liquid sodium or
carbon dioxide gas, which is pumped continuously through pipes embedded in reactor by
using a pump P, is used as a ‘coolant’ to transfer the heat produced to heat exchanger for
converting water into steam. The hot steam at high pressure goes into a turbine chamber and
makes the turbine rotate. The shaft of the generator also rotates and drives a generator
connected to it.
(c) By inserting the boron control rods fully into the reactor.
(d) Five places in India where nuclear powerplants are located are:
(i) Tarapur.



(ii) Kalpakkam.
(iii) Narora.
(iv) Kaprapur.
(vi) kaiga.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:158

Question 27:
(a) Differentiate between nuclear fission and nuclear fusion.
(b) Which of the two, nuclear fission and nuclear fusion, is made use of :
(i) for the production of electricity ?
(ii) for making a hydrogen bomb ?
(c) Which produces more energy : nuclear fusion or nuclear fission ?
(d) Calculate the energy released in joules when 5 g of a material is completely converted into
energy during a nuclear reaction.
(e) How much is this energy in MeV ? (Speed of light = 3 × 108 m/s)
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:159

Question 46:
A nuclear reaction is represented by the following equation

(a) Name the process represented by this equation and describe what takes place in this
reaction.
(b) Identify the particle c and the number x of such particles produced in the reaction.
(c) What does E represent ?
(d) Name one installation where the above nuclear reaction is utilised.
(e) What type of bomb is based on similar type of reactions ?
Solution :
(a) Nuclear fission; a large nucleus splits into two smaller nuclei with the release of energy,
brought about by the absorption of a neutron.
(b) Particles c is neutron; x=3



(c) Energy liberated
(d) Nuclear power station
(e) Atom bomb

Question 47:
A nuclear reaction is represented by the equation

(a) Name the process represented by this equation and describe what happens during this
reaction.
(b) Identify the particle c and the number x of such particles produced in the reaction.
(c) What does £ represent ?
(d) State two conditions under which such a reaction takes place.
(e) What type of nuclear bomb is based on similar reactions ?
Solution :
(a) Nuclear fusion; two smaller nuclei combine to form a bigger nucleus with the release of
energy, brought about under the conditions of high temperature and pressure.
(b) Particle c is neutron; x=1
(c) Energy liberated
(d) Millions of degree of temperature and millions of pascals of pressure.
(e) Hydrogen bomb.

Question 48:
The mass numbers of four elements A, B, C and D are 2, 20, 135 and 235, respectively. Which
one of them will be most suitable to make : (i) an atom bomb, and (it)a hydrogen bomb ?
Solution :
(i) D(mass number 235)
(ii) A(mass number2)

Question 49:
A nuclear power plant is working normally. What would you do if the reactor core suddenly got
too hot ?
Solution :
We will insert the control rods of boron a little more into the reactor to reduce the rate of
nuclear fission process.

Question 50:
A nuclear reactor has half the length of all its control rods inserted in graphite. What must be
done so that the reactor produces more heat ? Explain your answer.
Solution :
The control rods should be withdrawn a little more from inside the reactor. This will increase
the rate of nuclear fission process and hence more heat.

Question 51:
Explain why, in a nuclear reactor, the chain reaction stops if the control rods are fully inserted
into the graphite.
Solution :
The control rods absorb all the neutrons, stopping the nuclear chain reaction.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:161

Question 1:



Which of the two is a cleaner fuel : hydrogen or CNG ? Why ?
Solution :
Hydrogen is a cleaner fuel because burning of hydrogen produces only water. which is
harmless; but burning of CNG produces CO2 and water. CO2 produces greenhouse effect.

Question 2:
Which of the two is more energy efficient: filament type electric bulb or CFL ? Why ?
Solution :
CFL is more energy efficient because it wastes much less energy as heat than filament type
electric bulb.

Question 3:
How long are the energy resources of the earth like coal, petroleum and natural gas expected
to last ?
Solution :
Coal – 200 years
Petroleum – 40 years
Natural Gas – 60 years

Question 4:
Name two devices which can be utilised for the cooking of food so as to save fuel .
Solution :
Solar cooker; pressure cooker

Question 5:
What are the various factors which we should keep in mind while choosing a source of energy
?
Solution :
Various factors to be kept in mind while choosing a source of energy are:
1. the ease of extracting energy from that source
2. the cost of extracting energy from that source
3. the efficiency of technology available for extracting energy from that source
4. the damage to environment caused by using that source

Question 6:
Can any source of energy be pollution free ? Explain your answer with an example.
Solution :
No. No source of energy is pollution free.
For e.g., the use of wind generators is pollution-free but the processes involved in making it
must have damaged the

Question 7:
What are the environmental consequences of the increasing demand for energy ?
Solution :
The environmental consequences of the increasing the demand for energy are:
(i) The combustion of fossil fuels is producing acid rain and damaging plants, soil and aquatic
life.
(ii) The combustion of fossil fuels is increasing the green house effect.
(iii) Nuclear power plants are increasing radioactivity in the environment.
(iv) Construction of hydro-power plants is disturbing the ecological balance.

Question 8:



What steps would you suggest to reduce energy consumption ?
Solution :
Steps for reducing the energy consumption:-
(i) Switch off all the lights, fans, TV and other appliances when not needed.
(ii) Use of biogas as cooking fuel should be encouraged.
(iii) Bicycles should be used for short distances to save precious fuels like petrol.
(iv) Solar cookers should be used to cook food.



 Carbon and Its Compounds

Question 1:
Name the element whose one of the allotropic forms is buckminsterfullerene.
Solution :
Carbon

Question 2:
What are the two properties of carbon which lead to the formation of a large number of carbon
compounds ?
Solution :
Catenation(Self linking of carbon atoms to form long chains) and Tetravalency.

Question 3:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Solution :
False

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:221

Question 4:
Name the scientist who disproved the ‘vital force theory’ for the formation of organic
compounds.
Solution :
Friedrich Wohler.

Question 5:
Name the element whose allotropic form is graphite.
Solution :
Carbon.

Question 6:

In addition to some propane and ethane, LPG cylinders contain mainly two isomers of another
alkane. Name the two isomers and write their condensed structural formulae.
Solution :
n-butane and iso-butane.



Question 7:
Buckminsterfullerene is a spherical molecule in which 60 carbon atoms are arranged in
interlocking hexagonal and pentagonal rings of carbon atoms.
How many hexagons of carbon atoms are present in one molecule of buckminsterfullerene ?
How many pentagons of carbon atoms are present in one molecule of buckminsterfullerene ?
Solution :
(a) 20 hexagons
(b) 12 pentagons

Question 8:
Name the black substance of pencil. Will the current flow through the electrical circuit when
we use the sharpened ends of the pencil to complete the circuit ?
Solution :
Graphite
Yes, current will flow through the circuit since graphite is a good conductor of electricity.

Question 9:
How does graphite act as a lubricant ?
Solution :
Graphite is used as a lubricant in the form of graphite powder or mixed with petroleum jelly or
with any lubricant oil to form graphite grease.

Question 10:
Name the hardest natural substance known.
Solution :
Diamond

Question 11:
Which of the following molecule is called buckminsterfullerene ?
C90 C60 C70 C20
Solution :
C60 is called buckminsterfullerene

Question 12:
Give the name and structural formula of an alkyl group.
Solution :
Methyl



Question 13:
Write the electron-dot structures for : (i) ethane, (ii) ethene, and (iii) ethyne.
Solution :

Question 14:
Give the IUPAC name of the following compound :
C2H6
Solution :
Ethane.

Question 15:
Write the structural formula of propene.
Solution :

Question 16:
Write the structural formula of propyne.
Solution :



Question 17:
Write the structural formula of butane.
Solution :

Question 18:
What do you call the compounds having the same molecular formula but different structural
arrangements of atoms ?
Solution :
Isomers.

Question 19:
Write the names of any two isomers represented by the molecular formula C5H12.
Solution :
Isopentane and neopentane.

Question 20:
Write down (i) structural formula, and (ii) electron-dot formula, of any one isomer of hexane
(C6H14), other than n-hexane.
Solution :
(i) Isomer of hexane: 2-methylpentane



Question 21:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The form of carbon which is known as black lead is……………………..
(b) The form of carbon which is used as a lubricant at high temperature is……………………………
(c) Compounds of carbon with hydrogen alone are called…………………..
(d) CnH2n is the general formula of………………..
(e) Hydrocarbons having the general formula CnH2n-2 are called……………………..
(f) Ethene and ethyne are examples of…………….. hydrocarbons.
(g) Ethyne has…….. carbon-hydrogen single bonds.
(h) Carbon compounds have usually……………….. melting points and boiling points because they
are……………… in nature.
(i) The property of carbon atoms to form long chains in compounds is called…………………………
(j) The general formula CnH2n for cycloalkanes is the same as that of……………………..
(k) The IUPAC name of ethylene is……………….
(l) The IUPAC name of acetylene is……………..
Solution :
(a) Graphite
(b) Graphite
(c) Hydrocarbons
(d) Alkene
(e) Alkynes
(f) Unsaturated
(g) Two
(h) Low; covalent
(i) Catenation
(j) Alkenes
(k) Ethene
(l) Ethyne

Question 22:
(a) What is the atomic number of carbon. Write its electronic configuration.
(b) What type of chemical bonds are formed by carbon ? Why ?
(c) Name the three allotropic forms of carbon.
Solution :
(a)The atomic number of carbon is 6. Its electronic configuration is 2,4.
(b)Carbon forms covalent bonds because it can achieve the inert gas electron arrangement
only by sharing of electrons.
(c)Diamond, graphite and buckminsterfullerene.

Question 23:
(a) What is the general name of all the compounds made up of carbon and hydrogen ?
(b) Why does carbon form compounds mainly by covalent bonding ?
Solution :
(a) Hydrocarbons
(b) Carbon forms covalent bonds because it can achieve the inert gas electron
arrangement only by sharing of electrons.

Question 24:
(a) What is meant by catenation ? Name two elements which exhibit the property of
catenation.
(b) Write the names and structural formulae of all the possible isomers of hexane.
Solution :



(a) The property of self combination of carbon atoms to form long chains is called catenation.
Carbon and Silicon exhibit the property of catenation.

Question 25:
(a) What is buckminsterfullerene ? How is it related to diamond and graphite ?
(b) Why is diamond used for making cutting tools (like glass cutters) but graphite is not ?
(c) Why is graphite used for making dry cell electrodes but diamond is not ?
Solution :
(a) Buckminsterfullerene is an allotrope of carbon containing clusters of 60 carbon atoms
joined together to form spherical molecules. It burns on heating to form carbon dioxide and
nothing is left behind. This shows that it is made up of carbon only like diamond and graphite.
(b) Diamond used for making cutting tools but graphite is not because diamond is a very hard
substance and graphite is a soft substance.
(c) Graphite is used for making dry cell electrodes but diamond is not b ecause graphite is a
good conductor of electricity whereas diamond is a bad conductor of electricity.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:222

Question 26:
(a) Give the general formula of an : (i) alkane (ii) alkene (in) alkyne.
(b) Classify the following compounds as alkanes, alkenes and alkynes :
C2H4, C3H4, C4H8, C5H12, C5H8, C3H8, C6H6
Solution :
(a) (i) CnH2n+2
(ii) CnH2n
(iii) CnH2n-2
Alkanes:
C5H12
C3H8
Alkenes:
C2H4
C4H8
Alkynes:
C3H4
C5H8

Question 27:
(a) Friedrich Wohler converted an inorganic compound into an organic compound in the
laboratory.



(i) Give the name and formula of inorganic compound.
(ii) Write the name and formula of organic compound formed.
(b) Give the molecular formula of butane and mention the names of its two isomers. Name
one fuel which contains both these isomers.
Solution :
(a) (i) Ammonium
cyanate, NH4CNO
(ii) Urea, CO(NH2)2
(b) The molecular
formula of butane is C4H10; Its isomers are n-butane
and 2-methylpropane; LPG.

Question 28:
(a) Give IUPAC names and formulae of an organic compound containing single bonds and the
other
containing a triple bond.
(b) Which of the following is the molecular formula of benzene ?
C6H6, C6H10, C6H12, C6H14
(c) Which of the two has a branched chain : isobutane or normal butane ?
Solution :
(a) Methane (single bond):
CH4
Ethyne (triple bond): C2H2
(b) Benzene: C6H6
(c) Isobutene

Question 29:
Catenation is the ability of an atom to form bonds with other atoms of the same element. It is
exhibited by both carbon and silicon. Compare the ability of catenation of the two elements.
Give reasons.
Solution :
Carbon forms strong bonds among themselves and with other elements and this makes the
carbon compounds stable whereas silicon shows catenation property due to which it forms
compounds with hydrogen having chains of up to 7 or 8 silicon atoms; but due to weak bonds,
these compounds are unstable.

Question 30:
(a) How can diamonds be made artificially ? How do synthetic diamonds differ from natural
ones ?
(b) Give any two differences between the properties of diamond and graphite. What causes
these differences ?
Solution :
(a)Diamonds can be made artificially by subjecting pure carbon to very high
pressure and temperature. The synthetic diamonds are small whereas natural
diamonds are big.
(b)(i) Diamond is hard whereas graphite is soft.
(ii)Diamond is a non-conductor of electricity whereas graphite is a good conductor of
electricity. The difference in the physical properties of diamond and graphite arises because
of the different arrangements of carbon atoms in them.

Question 31:
(a) Why does the element carbon from a large number of carbon compounds ?



(b) Write down the structures and names of two isomers of butane (C4H10)
Solution :
(a) Carbon forms a large number of carbon compounds because carbon atoms can link with
one another by means of covalent bonds to form long chains of carbon atoms.

Question 32:
(a) Give the name and structural formula of one member each of the following :
(i) alkane (ii) alkene (iii) alkyne (iv) cycloalkane
(b) Give the common name of (i) ethyne, and (ii) ethene.
(c) Write the molecular formula and structure of benzene.
Solution :

(b) (i) Acetylene
(ii) Ethylene



(c) C6H6;

Question 33:
(a) What is the unique property of carbon atom ? How is this property helpful to us ?
(b) Explain why, diamond is hard while graphite is soft (though both are made of carbon
atoms).
Solution :
(a) The most unique property of carbon atom is its ability to combine itself, atom to atom to
form long chains. This property of self combination is useful to us because it gives rise to an
extremely large number of carbon compounds (or organic compounds).
(b) A diamond crystal is a giant molecule of carbon atoms. Each carbon atom in the diamond
crystal is linked to four other carbon atoms by strong covalent bonds. The four surrounding
atoms are at the four vertices of a regular tetrahedron. This rigid structure of diamond makes
it a very hard substance.
The structure of graphite is very different from that of diamond. A graphite crystal consists of
layers of carbon atoms or sheets of carbon atoms and these layers are held together by weak
Van der Waals forces. Due to this sheet like structure, graphite is a comparatively soft
substance.

Question 34:
(a) Giving their structures, state the number of single bonds, double bonds and triple bonds (if
any) in the following compounds :
(i) ethyne (ii) ethene (iii) benzene
(b) Write the molecular formula and structure of cyclohexane. How many covalent bonds are
there in a molecule of cyclohexane ?
Solution :
(a) (i) Ethyne:- Single bonds: Two; Triple bond: One
(ii) Ethene:- Single bonds: Four; Double bond: One
(iii) Ethane:- Single bonds: Nine; Double bonds: Three

Question 35:
(a) Write two points of difference in the structures of diamond and graphite.
(b) Explain why, graphite can be used as a lubricant but diamond cannot.
(c) Explain why, diamond can be used in rock drilling equipment but graphite cannot.
(d) State one use of diamond which depends on its ‘extraordinary brilliance’ and one use of
graphite which depends on its being ‘black and quite soft’.
Solution :
(a)
Diamond:



(i) Each carbon atom is linked to four other carbon atoms.
(ii) A diamond crystal has a tetrahedral arrangement of carbon atoms.
Graphite:
(i) Each carbon atom is joined to only three other carbon atoms.
(ii) A graphite crystal has flat hexagonal rings structure.
(b) Due to its softness, powdered graphite can be used a lubricant whereas diamond being
extremely hard can not be used as lubricant.
(c) Due to its rigid structure, diamond is the hardest known substance to man. Hence, it is
used in rock drilling equipments but graphite is soft and hence not used in rock drilling
equipments.
(d) Diamonds are used for making jewellery.
Graphite is used for making pencil cores or ‘pencil leads’.

Question 36:
(a) What is diamond ? Of what substance is diamond made ?
(b) Describe the structure of diamond. Draw a simple diagram to show the arrangement of
carbon atoms in diamond.
(c) Explain why, diamond has a high melting point.
(d) State any two uses of diamond.
Solution :
(a) Diamond is a colourless transparent substance having extraordinary brilliance. It is made
up of carbon.
(b) A diamond crystal is a giant molecule of carbon atoms. Each carbon atom in the diamond
crystal is linked to four other carbon atoms by strong covalent bonds. The four surrounding
carbon atoms are at the four vertices of a regular tetrahedron. This rigid structure of diamond
makes it a very hard substance.

(c) Diamond has a high melting point because a lot of heat energy is required to break the
network of strong covalent bonds in the diamond crystal.
(d) (i) Used in rock drilling equipment (ii) Used in making jewellery.

Question 37:
(a) What is graphite ? Of what substance is graphite made ?
(b) Describe the structure of graphite with the help of a labelled diagram.
(c) Why is graphite a good conductor of electricity but diamond is a non-conductor of
electricity ?
(d) State any two uses of graphite.
Solution :
(a) Graphite is a greyish-black opaque substance. It is made up of carbon.
(b) The structure of graphite is very different from that of diamond. A graphite crystal consists
of layers of carbon atoms or sheets of carbon atoms. Each carbon atom in a graphite layer is
joined to other three carbon atoms by strong covalent bonds to form flat hexagonal rings. The
various layers of carbon atoms in graphite are held together by weak Van der Waals forces.



Due to this sheet like structure, graphite is a comparatively soft substance.

(c) Due to the presence of free electrons in a graphite crystal, it conducts electricity however; a
diamond crystal does not have free electrons so it does not conduct electricity.
(d) (i) Used as a lubricant (ii) Used for making pencil leads.

Question 38:
(a) Explain the term ‘isomers’. Give one example of isomers.
(b) Write (i) structural formula, and (ii) electron-dot structure, of any one isomer of n-heptane
(C7H16)
(c) Write IUPAC name of the compound having the formula n-C4H10.
(d) Give the IUPAC names for the following :

Solution :
(a) The organic compounds having the same molecular formula but different structures are
known as isomers for ex: n-butane and iso-butane are isomers.

(c) Butane
(d) (i) 2-methylpropane
(ii) 2-methylbutane
(iii) Propene
(iv) Propyne

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:223

Question 39:
(a) What are hydrocarbons ? Explain with examples.
(b) Explain the meaning of saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons with two examples each.



(c) Give the names and structural formulae of one saturated cyclic hydrocarbon and one
unsaturated cyclic hydrocarbon.
(d) Give one example of a hydrocarbon, other than pentane, having more than three isomers.
(e) How many isomers of the following hydrocarbons are possible ?
(i) C3H8 (ii) C4H10 (iii) C5H12 (iv) C6H14
Solution :
(a) A compound made up of hydrogen and carbon only is called a hydrocarbon (Hydrogen +
Carbon= Hydrocarbon). For exampe: methane (CH4), ethane (C2H6), ethene (C2H4), and ethyne
(C2H2), all are hydrocarbons as they are made up of only two elements: carbon and hydrogen.
(b) Saturated Hydrocarbons: These are the ones in which the carbon atoms are connected by
only single bonds. They are also known as alkanes.
Example: Methane (CH4) and ethane (C2H6)
Unsaturated Hydrocarbons: These are the ones in which two carbon atoms are connected by a
double bond or a triple bond.
Example: Ethene (C2H4) and ethyne (C2H2)
(c) Saturated cyclic hydrocarbon: Cyclohexane, C6H12
Unsaturated cyclic hydrocarbon: Benzene, C6H6
(d) Hexane, C6H14
(e) (i) None (ii) Two (iii) Three (iv) Five

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:224

Question 60:
A solid element X has four electrons in the outermost shell of its atom. An allotrope Y of this
element is used as a dry lubricant in machinery and also in making pencil leads.
(a) What is element X ?
(b) Name the allotrope Y.
(c) State whether allotrope Y is a good conductor or non-conductor of electricity.
(d) Name one use of allotrope Y (other than lubrication and pencil leads)
(e) Name two other allotropes of element X.
Solution :
(a) Element X : Carbon
(b) Allotrope Y: Graphite
(c) Y is a good conductor of electricity.
(d) Y is used for making graphite electrodes or carbon electrodes in dry cells.
(e) Allotropes of X: Diamond and buckminsterfullerene

Question 61:
Two organic compounds A and B have the same molecular formula C6H12. Write the names
and structural formulae :
(a) if A is a cyclic compound
(b) if B is an open chain compound
(c) Which compound contains single bonds as well as a double bond ?
(d) Which compound contains only single bonds ?
Solution :



Question 62:
The solid element A exhibits the property of catenation. It is also present in the form of a gas B
in the air which is utilised by plants in photosynthesis. An allotrope C of this element is used in
glass cutters.
(a) What is element A ?
(b) What is the gas B ?
(c) Name the allotrope C.
(d) State another use of allotrope C (other than in glass cutters).
(e) Name another allotrope of element A which exists as spherical molecules.
(f) Name a yet another allotrope of element A which conducts electricity.
Solution :
(a) Element A: Carbon
(b) Gas B: Carbon dioxide
(c) Allotrope C: Diamond
(d) Used for making jewellery
(e) Buckminsterfullerene
(f) Graphite

Question 63:
An element E exists in three allotropic forms A, B and C. In allotrope A, the atoms of element E
are joined to form spherical molecules. In allotrope B, each atom of element E is surrounded
by three other E atoms to form a sheet like structure. In allotrope C, each atom of element E is
surrounded by four other E atoms to form a rigid structure.
(a) Name the element E.
(b) What is allotrope A ?
(c) What is allotrope B ?
(d) What is allotrope C ?
(e) Which allotrope is used in making jewellery ?
(f) Which allotrope is used in making anode of a dry cell ?
Solution :
(a) Element E: Carbon
(b) Allotrope A: Buckminsterfullerene
(c) Allotrope B: Graphite



(d) Allotrope C: Diamond
(e) C
(f) B

Question 64:
You are given the following molecular formulae of some hydrocarbons :
C5H8; C7H4; C6H6; C5H10; C7 H12; C6H12
(a) Which formula represents cyclohexane as well as hexene ?
(b) Which formula represents benzene ?
(c) Which three formulae represent open chain unsaturated hydrocarbons having double
bonds ?
(e) Which two formulae represent unsaturated hydrocarbons having triple bonds ?
(f) Which three formulae can represent cyclic hydrocarbons ?
Solution :
(a) C6H12
(b) C6H6
(c) C7H14;
C5H10; C6H12
(d) C5H8;
C7H12
(e) C7H14;
C5H10; C6H12

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:225

Question 65:
Which of the following compounds can have a triple bond ?
C2H4, C3H4, C3H6
Solution :
C3H4

Question 66:
Write the molecular and structural formula of a cyclic hydrocarbon whose molecule contains 8
atoms of carbon.
Solution :
Molecular formula: C8H16

Question 67:
What is the molecular formula and structural formula of a cyclic hydrocarbon whose one
molecule contains 8 hydrogen atoms ?
Solution :
Molecular formula: C4H8



Question 68:
Write the molecular formula of : (i) an alkane (ii) an alkene, and (iii) an alkyne, each having 20
carbon atoms.
Solution :
(i) C20H42
(ii) C20H40 (iii) C20H38

Question 69:
Which of the following compounds can have a double bond ?
C4H10; C5H8; C5H10
Solution :
C5H10

Question 70:
Which of the following hydrocarbons is unsaturated ?
C3H4; C2H6
Solution :
C3H4

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:239

Question 1:
Write the molecular formula of ethanol.
Solution :
C2H5OH

Question 2:
What is the next higher homologue of methanol (CH3OH) ?
Solution :
Ethanol (C2H5OH)

Question 3:
Identify the functional group present in the following compound and name it according to
IUPAC system :
CH3OH
Solution :
Alcohol group;
Methanol

Question 4:
Give the common name and IUPAC name of the simplest aldehyde.
Solution :
Common name:
formaldehyde
IUPAC name: methanal



Question 5:
What is the common name of methanal ?
Solution :
Formaldehyde

Question 6:
Write the names of the following functional groups :

Solution :
(i) Alkyne
(ii) Alkene

Question 7:
Name the simplest ketone.
Solution :
Propanone

Question 8:
What is the common name of propanone ?
Solution :
Acetone

Question 9:
Write the IUPAC names of the following :
(i) CH3COCH3 (ii) CH3COCH2CH3
Solution :
(i) Propanone
(ii) Butanone

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:240

Question 10:
Write the name and chemical formula of the simplest organic acid.
Solution :
Formic acid; HCOOH

Question 11:
Write the IUPAC names, common names and formulae of the first two members of the
homologous series of carboxylic acids.
Solution :

Question 12:
What is the common name of : (a) methanoic acid, and (b) ethanoic acid ?
Solution :
(a) Methanoicacid – Formic acid
(b) Ethanoic acid – Acetic acid



Question 13:
Draw the structures for the following compounds :
(a) Ethanoic acid (b) Propanoic acid
Solution :

Question 14:
Give the common names and IUPAC names of the following compounds :
(a) HCOOH (b) CH3COOH
Solution :

Question 15:
Give the name and structural formula of one homologue of HCOOH.
Solution :
Ethanoic acid; CH3COOH

Question 16:
Write the formulae of: (a) methanoic acid, and (b) ethanoic acid.
Solution :
(a) Methanoic acid: HCOOH
(b) Ethanoic acid: CH3COOH

Question 17:
Give the common name and IUPAC name of C2H5
Solution :
Common name: Ethyl alcohol
IUPAC name: Ethanol

Question 18:
Give the IUPAC name of the following compound :
C3H7OPI
Solution :
Propanol, C3H7OH



Question 19:
Give the name and structural formula of one member of the following :
Alcohols
Solution :
Ethanol; C2H5OH

Question 20:
Give IUPAC names of the following compounds :
(a) C4H9OH (b) C5HnOH
Solution :
(a) Butanol, C4H9OH
(b) Pentanol, C5H11OH

Question 21:
What is the common name of methanol ?
Solution :
Methyl alcohol

Question 22:
What is the difference between two consecutive homologues :
(i) in terms of molecular mass ?
(ii) in terms of number and kind of atoms per molecule ?
Solution :
(i) 14 u
(ii) Two consecutive homologues differ by 1 carbon atom and 2 hydrogen atoms in their
molecular formulae.

Question 23:
What type of fuels :
(a) burn with a flame ?
(b) burn without a flame ?
Solution :
(a) Fuels which vaporise on heating, burn with a flame.
(b) Fuels which do not vaporise on heating, burn without a flame.

Question 24:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
The minimum number of carbon atoms in a ketone molecule is two.
Solution :
False

Question 25:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The next higher homologue of ethanol is……….
(b) The next homologue of C2H5OH is……….
(c) The next higher homologue of ethane is………..
(d) The functional group present in ethanol is……….

Solution :
(a) Propanol



(b) C3H7OH
(c) Propane
(d) -OH (alcohol)
(e) Carboxylic acids

Question 26:
(a) Give the general name of the class of compounds having the general formula CnH2n-2.Write
name of the first member of this homologous series.
(b) The general formula of a homologous series of carbon compounds is CnH2n. Write the
molecular formulae of the second and fourth members of the series.
(c) Write the molecular formulae of the third and fifth members of homologous series of
carbon compounds represented by the general formula CnH2n+2.
Solution :
(a) Alkynes, CnH2n-2
First member: Ethyne
(b) Second member: C3H6
Fourth member: C5H10
(c) Third member: C3H8
Fifth member: C5H12

Question 27:
(a) Give the names and structural formulae of the next two higher homologues of methane.
(b) The molecular formula of a hydrocarbon is C10H18. Name its homologous series.
(c) Select the hydrocarbons which are members of the same homologous series. Give the
name of each series.
C5H10 ; C3H8; C6H10; C4H10; C7H12; C8H16
Solution :
(a)

Question 28:
(a) Give the molecular formula of one homologue of each of the following :
(i) C3H6 (ii) C2H6 (iii) C2H2
(b) What is the difference in the molecular mass of any two adjacent homologues ?
(c) By how many carbon atoms and hydrogen atoms do any two adjacent homologues differ ?
Solution :
(a) (i) C4H8 (ii) C3H8
(iii) C3H4
(b) 14 u
(c) 1 carbon atom and 2 hydrogen atoms i.e. a CH2 group.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:241



Question 29:
(a) Write the formula of the functional group present in carboxylic acids.
(b) Name the functional group present in CH3—C ≡ CH.
(c) Name the functional groups present in the following compounds :
(i) CH3CHO (ii) CH3CH2COOH (iii) CH3COCH3 (iv) CH3CH2CH2OH
Solution :

Question 30:
(a) Write the IUPAC name and common name of CH3CI
(b) Draw the structure of chlorobutane.
(c) Draw the structure for bromopentane. Are structural isomers possible for bromopentane ?
Solution :

Question 31:
(a) Write the name and formula of an organic compound containing a ketone functional group.
(b) Write the names and formulae for the first three members of the homologous series of
chloroalkanes.
(c) How would you name the following compound ?
CH3—CH2—Br
Solution :
(a) Acetone – CH3COCH3
(b) (i) Chloromethane – CH3Cl
(ii) Chloroethane – C2H5Cl
(iii) Chloropropane – C3H7Cl
(c) Ethylbromide
(a) Ketones
(b) CH3COOH
(c) Formaldehyde

Question 33:
(a) Define a homologous series. Give the name and structural formula of one homologue of
the following :
CH3OH
(b) Write the molecular formula of the third member of the homologous series of carbon
compounds with general formula CnH2n+1OH.
(c) Name any two fossil fuels.
Solution :



Question 34:
(a) Draw the structures for the following compounds :
(a) Propanone (b) Butanone
(b) Write the IUPAC names of the following :
(i) HCHO (ii) CH3CHO (Hi) CH3CH2CHO (iv) CH3CH2CH2CHO
(c) Which functional group is likely to be present in an organic compound having the molecular
formula C4H10O ? Write the formula of the organic compound.
Solution :

Question 35:
(a) Match the formulae in group A with appropriate names from group B :
Group A : CH3COOH, CH3CHO, CH3OH
Group B : Ethanol, Methanol, Ethanal, Ethanoic acid
(b) Draw the structure of butanoic acid.
(c) What is the IUPAC name of acetic acid ?
Solution :

Question 36:
(a) Which functional group do you think can be present in an organic compound having the
molecular formula C5H10O2 ? Write the formula of the organic compound.
(b) Give one example each of the compounds having the following functional groups :



(i) Aldehyde group (ii) Alcohol group (iii) Carboxylic acid group (iv) Halo group
(c) Give one example each of the compounds having the following functional groups :
(i) Alkene group (ii) Alkyne group
Solution :

Question 37:
(a) What is the molecular formula and structure of the alcohol which can be thought to be
derived from pentane ?
(b) Write the names of the following functional groups :

(c) What makes the candle flame yellow and luminous ?
Solution :
(a) C5H12O or C5H11OH
(b) (i) Aldehyde group
(ii) Alcohol group
(iii) Carboxylic acid group
(iv) Ketone group
(v) Halo group
(c) When a candle is lighted, the wax melts, rises up the wick and gets converted into vapours.
In a candle, there is no provision for the proper mixing of oxygen (of air) for burning wax
vapours. So, the wax vapours bum in an insufficient supply of oxygen (of air) which leads to
incomplete combustion of wax. This incomplete combustion of wax produces small unburnt
carbon particles. These solid carbon particles rise in the flame, get heated and glow to give out
yellowish light. This makes the candle flame yellow and luminous.

Question 38:
(a) What is a homologous series ? Explain with an example.
(b) State two characteristics of a homologous series.
(c) The molecular formula of an organic compound is C18H36. Name its homologous series.
(d) Select the hydrocarbons which belong to the same homologous series. Give the name of
each series.
CH4, C2H2, C2H4, C2H6, C4H10, C3H4, C3H6
(e) What is meant by ‘heteroatom’? Give examples. Write the names and formulae of two
organic compounds containing different heteroatoms.
Solution :
(a) A homologous series is a group of organic compounds having similar structures and
similar chemical properties in which the successive compounds differ by CH2 group.
Example of Homologous series: All the alkanes have similar structures with single covalent
bonds and show similar chemical properties, so they can be grouped together in the form of a
homologous series.
Homologous series of alkanes: Methane, CH4; Ethane, C2H6; Propane, C3H8; Butane, C4H10;
Pentane, C5H12



(b) (i) All the members of the homologous series can be represented by the same general
formula.
(ii) Any two adjacent homologues differ by 1 carbon atom and 2 hydrogen atoms in their
molecular formulae.
(c) Alkene, CnH2n
(d) Alkanes: CH4, C2H6, C4H10?
Alkenes :C2H4, C3H6
Alkynes : C2H2, C3H4
(e) In an organic compound, any atom other than carbon and hydrogen is called a heteroatom.
Example: Chlorine (Cl), Bromine (Br), Oxygen (O)
Chloromethane – CH3Cl and methanol – CH3OH

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:242

Question 39:
(a) What is meant by a functional group ? Explain with an example.
(b) Write three common functional groups present in organic compounds. Give their
symbols/formulae.
(c) Name the functional groups present in the following compounds :
(i) CH3COOH (ii) CH3CH2CHO (iii) C2H5OH (iv) CH3COCH2CH3
(d) Name the functional group which always occurs in the middle of a carbon chain.
(e) Draw the structures for the following compounds :
(i) Ethanal (ii) Propanal (iii) Butanal (iv) Pentanal
Solution :
(a) An ‘atom’ or ‘a group of atoms’ which makes a carbon compound (or organic compound)
reactive and decides its properties (or functions) is called a functional group. The alcohol
group, -OH, present in ethanol, C2H5OH, is an example of a functional group.
(b) (i) Halo group: -X
(ii) Alcohol group: -OH
(iii) Aldehyde group: -CHO
(c) (i) Carboxylic acid group
(ii) Aldehyde group
(iii) Alcohol group
(iv) Ketone group
(d) Ketone group, -CO-



Question 40:
(a) What happens when carbon burns in air ? Write the chemical equation of the reaction
which takes place.
(b) Why are coal and petroleum called fossil fuels ?
(c) Explain how coal was formed in the earth.
(d) Describe how petroleum was formed in the earth.
(e) Name a fossil fuel other than coal and petroleum.
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:243

Question 56:
An organic compound having the molecular formula C2H60 can exist in the form of two
isomers A and B having different functional groups. The isomer A is a liquid which is used as a



solvent for nail polish. The isomer B is also a liquid. An aqueous solution of one of the lower
homologues of B is used for preserving biological specimens in the laboratory
(a) What is compound A ?
(b) Write the electron-dot structure of A.
(c) What is compound B ?
(d) Write the electron-dot structure of B.
(e) Name the lower homologue of compound B which is used in preserving biological
specimens.
Solution :

Question 57:
A hard material X which is mined from the earth is used as a household fuel and also for the
generation of electricity at Thermal Power Stations. A soft material Y is also used as a fuel in
the form of candles. A gaseous material Z which occurs along with petroleum is increasingly
being used as a fuel in running vehicles in its compressed form.
(a) What are materials, X, Y and Z ?
(b) When materials X, Y and Z are burned separately :
(i) Which material burns by producing a yellow, luminous flame ?
(ii) Which material ultimately burns without producing a flame ?
(iii) Which material can burn in a gas stove by producing a blue flame ?
Solution :
(a) X is coal; Y is wax; Z is natural gas
(b)(i) Y (wax)
(ii) X (coal)
(iii) Z (natural gas)

Question 58:
Three organic compounds A, B and C have the following molecular formulae :
A C4H8O2
B C4H10O
C C4H8O
(a) Which compound contains an alcohol group ? Write its name and structural formula.
(b) Which compound contains a carboxyl group ? Write its name and structural formula.
(c) Which molecular formula can represent an aldehyde as well as a ketone ? Write the names
and structural formulae of the aldehyde and ketone represented by this molecular formula.
Solution :



Question 59:
A colourless organic liquid X of molecular formula C2H402 turns blue litmus to red. Another
colourless organic liquid Y of molecular formula C2H60 has no action on any litmus but it is
used as a nail polish remover. A yet another colourless organic liquid Z of molecular formula
C2H6O has also no action on litmus but it is used in tincture of iodine.
(a) Name the liquid X. To which homologous series does it belong ? Give the name of another
member of this homologous series.
(b) Name the liquid Y. To which homologous series does it belong ? Write the name of another
member of this homologous series.
(c) Can you name an organic compound having the same molecular formula as liquid Y but
which belongs to a different homologous series ? What is this homologous series ?
(d) Name the liquid Z. To which homologous series does it belong ? Write the name of another
member of this homologous series.
Solution :
(a) Liquid X is ethanoic acid; it belongs to homologous series of carboxylic acids. Methanoic
acid is another member of this homologous series.
(b) Liquid Y is Propanone; it belongs to homologous series of ketones. Butanone is another
member of this homologous series.
(c) Propanal; it belongs to homologous series of aldehydes.
(d) Liquid Z is ethanol; it belongs to homologous series of alcohols. Methanol is another
member of this homologous series.

Question 60:
You are given an organic compound having the molecular formula C2H8. Give the name and
formula of the compound formed :
(a) when one H atom of C3H8 is replaced by a Cl atom.
(b) when one H atom of C3H8 is replaced by OH group.
(c) when one H atom of C3H8 is replaced by a CHO group.
(d) when one H atom of C3H8 is replaced by a COOH group.
(e) when two H atoms joined to the middle carbon atom of C3H8 are replaced by one O atom.
Solution :
(a) Chloropropane, CH3-CH2-CH2-Cl
(b) Propanol, CH3-CH2-CH2-OH



(c) Butanal, CH3-CH2-CH2-CHO
(d) Butanoic acid, CH3-CH2-CH2-COOH
(e) Propanone, CH3-CO-CH3

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:262

Question 1:
Name the gas evolved when ethanoic acid is added to sodium carbonate. How would you
prove the presence of this gas ?
Solution :
Carbon dioxide (CO2) gas is evolved in the reaction. When passed through lime water, it turns
lime water milky.

Question 2:
Which of the following will give brisk effervescence with sodium hydrogencarbonate and why ?
CH3COOH, CH3CH2OH
Solution :
CH3COOH will give brick effervescence. Being acid, it reacts with sodium hydrogencarbonate
to produce carbon dioxide gas.

Question 3:
Name the functional group present in an organic compound which gives brisk effervescence
with NaHC03.
Solution :
Carboxylic acid group, -COOH gives brisk effervescence with NaHCO3

Question 4:
Name the hydrocarbon formed when ethanol is heated with cone. H2S04 at 170°C ? What is
this reaction known as ?
Solution :
Ethene is formed when ethanol is heated with conc. H o

2SO4 at 170 C. This reaction is called
dehydration.

Question 5:
Why does ethyne (acetylene) burn with a sooty flame ?
Solution :
Ethyne (acetylene) burn with a sooty flame because ethyne is an unsaturated hydrocarbon and
the percentage of carbon in these hydrocarbons is comparatively higher which does not get
oxidised completely in oxygen of air.

Question 6:
Name the product formed when hydrogen is added to ethene.
Solution :
Ethane is formed when hydrogen is added to ethene.

Question 7:
Explain why, ethene decolourises bromine water whereas ethane does not.
Solution :
Ethene decolourises bromine water because ethene is an alkene. And all alkenes and alkynes
are unsaturated compounds which decolourise bromine water. On the other hand, ethane
being an alkane is a saturated compound which does not decolourise bromine water.



Question 8:
Name two catalysts which can be used in the hydrogenation of unsaturated compounds.
Solution :
Nickel or palladium can be used as catalyst in the hydrogenation of unsaturated compounds.

Question 9:
State two disadvantages of incomplete combustion.
Solution :
Disadvantages of incomplete combustion:
(i) It leads to the formation of soot which is nothing but unburnt carbon which pollutes the
atmosphere, blackens cooking utensils.
(ii) It leads to the formation of an extremely poisonous gas called carbon monoxide.

Question 10:
What happens when (give chemical equation) :
Sodium reacts with ethanol (ethyl alcohol)
Solution :

Question 11:
Describe one reaction of ethanol.
Solution :

Question 12:
Name one liquid carbon compound which is being used as an additive in petrol in some
countries.
Solution :
Ethanol is used as an additive in petrol.

Question 13:
What are the raw materials required for making soap in a laboratory (or at home) ?
Solution :
(i) Vegetable oil (like castor oil, cottonseed oil or soyabean oil)
(ii) Sodium hydroxide (caustic soda)
(iii) Sodium chloride (common salt)

Question 14:
Would you be able to check whether water is hard by using a detergent ? Why ?
Solution :
No, we would not be able to check the hardness of water by using a detergent because a
detergent forms lather easily even with hard water.

Question 15:
Describe a test for carboxylic acids.
Solution :
Litmus test: Some blue litmus solution is added to the organic compound (to be tested). If the
blue litmus solution turns red, it shows that the organic compound is acidic in nature and
hence it is a carboxylic acid.



Question 16:
Why is the conversion of ethanol into ethanoic acid an oxidation reaction ?
Solution :

Question 17:
Explain why, alkanes are excellent fuels.
Solution :
Alkanes burn in air to produce a lot of heat due to which they are known to be excellent fuels.

Question 18:
Name one chemical compound which can be used to distinguish between ethanol and
ethanoic acid.
Solution :
Sodium hydrogencarbonate can be used to distinguish between ethanol and ethanoic acid.

Question 19:
Complete the following equations :

Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:263

Question 20:
Complete and balance the following equations :

Solution :

Question 21:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The process of burning of a hydrocarbon in the presence of air to give CO2, H2O, heat and
light is known as………
(b) The sodium salt of a long chain fatty acid is called………………..
(c) is better than soap for washing clothes when the water is hard.
(d) The organic acid present in vinegar is………………..
Solution :
(a) Combustion
(b) Soap



(c) Detergent
(d) Ethanoic acid

Question 22:
Which of the following hydrocarbons will give substitution reactions and why ?
CH4, C3H6, C3H8, C4H6, C5H12, C5H10
Solution :
CH4, C3H8 and C5H12; all these are saturated hydrocarbons (Alkanes) and hence will give
substitution reactions.
Solution 23
C2H4 and C3H4 will give addition reactions because these are unsaturated hydrocarbons
(Alkene and Alkyne) and unsaturated hydrocarbons give addition reactions.

Question 24:
(a) Write the chemical equation of the reaction which takes place during the burning of ethanol
in air.
(b) Why is ethanol used as a fuel ?
(c) State two uses of ethanol (other than as a fuel).
Solution :

(b) Since, ethanol burns with a clear flame giving a lot of heat, therefore, it is used as a fuel.
(c) Uses of ethanol:
(i) It is used in the manufacture of paints, varnishes, lacquers, medicines, perfumes, dyes,
soaps and synthetic rubber.
(ii) It is used as a solvent. Many organic compounds which are insoluble in water are soluble in
ethyl alcohol.

Question 25:
(a) What happens when propanoic acid is warmed with methanol in the presence of a few
drops of
concentrated sulphuric acid ? Write equation of the reaction involved.
(b) What change will you observe if you test soap solution with a litmus paper (red and blue) ?
Give reason for your observation.
(c) What is meant by denatured alcohol ? What is the need to denature alcohol ?
Solution :
(a) Propanoic acid will react with the alcohol in the presence of concentrated sulphuric acid to
form esters.

(b) Red litmus paper turns blue in soap solution and no change occurs on blue litmus paper
because soap is basic in nature.
(c) Denatured alcohol is ethyl alcohol which has been made unfit for drinking purposes by
adding small amounts of poisonous substances like methanol, pyridine, copper sulphate etc.
This is done to prevent the misuse of industrial alcohol for drinking purposes or black
marketing (as it is supplied duty free for industrial purposes by the government).

Question 26:
(a) How would you test for an alcohol ?
(b) Give the harmful effects of drinking alcohol.
(c)Explain why, methanol is much more dangerous to drink than ethanol.
Solution :



(a) Sodium metal test: Add a small piece of sodium metal to the organic liquid (to be tested),
taken in a dry test tube. If bubbles (or effervescence) of hydrogen gas are produced, it
indicates that the given organic liquid is an alcohol.
(b) Harmful effects of drinking alcohol:
(i) Alcohol slows down the activity of the nervous system and brain due to which the
judgement of a person is impaired and his reaction becomes slow.
(ii) Heavy drinking of alcohol on a particular occasion leads to staggered movement, slurred
speech and vomiting.
(c) Unlike ethanol, drinking methanol, even in a small quantity can be fatal leading to
permanent blindness and even death. Methanol damages the optic nerve causing permanent
blindness in a person. This happens because methanol is oxidised to methanal in the liver of a
person. This methanal reacts rapidly with the components of the cell causing coagulation of
their protoplasm. Due to this, the cells stop functioning normally.

Question 27:
How would you convert:
(a) ethanol into ethene ?
(b) propanol into propanoic acid ?
Name the process in each case and write the equations of the reactions involved.
Solution :

Question 28:
Give reasons for the following observations :
(a) Air holes of a gas burner have to be adjusted when the vessels being heated get blackened
by the flame.
(b) Use of synthetic detergents causes pollution of water.
Solution :
(a) Air holes of a gas burner have to be adjusted b ecause blackening of vessels show that the
air holes of the gas stove are getting blocked and hence the fuel is not burning completely
(due to insufficient supply of oxygen).
(b) Some of the detergents (synthetic) are not bio-degradable, that is they cannot be
decomposed by micro organisms like bacteria and hence cause water pollution.

Question 29:
(a) What would be observed on adding a 5% alkaline potassium permanganate solution drop
by drop to
some warm ethanol in a test-tube ? Write the name of the compound formed during the
chemical reaction. Also write chemical equation of the reaction which takes place.
(b) How would you distinguish experimentally between an alcohol and a carboxylic acid on the
basis of a chemical property ?
Solution :
(a) On adding 5% alkaline potassium permanganate solution drop by drop to some warm
ethanol, we would observe that the purple color of potassium permanganate starts
disappearing; the product formed by this process; ethanoic acid can turn blue litmus red.

(b) A carboxylic acid reacts with sodium hydrogencarbonate to give brisk effervescence of
carbon dioxide gas but an alcohol does not react with sodium hydrogencarbonate.



Question 30:
Name the functional group of organic compounds that can be hydrogenated. With the help of
a suitable example, explain the process of hydrogenation, mentioning the conditions of the
reaction and any one change in physical property with the formation of the product. Name any
one natural source of organic compounds that are hydrogenated.
Solution :
Alkenes can be hydrogenated.
The addition of hydrogen to an unsaturated hydrocarbon to obtain a saturated hydrocarbon is
called hydrogenation.
Example: Ethene reacts with hydrogen in the presence of finely divided nickel as catalyst to
form ethane.
Liquid vegetable oils are hydrogenated into vegetable ghee (solid fat).

Question 31:
(a) Name the gas evolved when ethanol reacts with sodium.
(b) What type of compound is formed when a carboxylic acid reacts with an alcohol in the
presence of cone. H2SO4 ?
(c) What will you observe when dilute ethanoic acid and dilute hydrochloric acid are put on
universal indicator paper, one by one ? What does it show ?
Solution :
(a) Hydrogen gas is evolved when ethanol reacts with sodium.
(b) Esters are formed when a carboxylic acid reacts with an alcohol in the presence of conc.
H2SO4.
(c) Dilute ethanoic acid turns universal indicator paper to orange, showing that its pH is about
4 which tell us that ethanoic acid is a weak acid. On the other hand, dilute hydrochloric acid
turns universal indicator paper to red, showing that its pH is about 1. This shows us that
hydrochloric acid is a strong acid.

Question 32:
(a) What type of compound is CH3COOH ?
(b) What substance should be oxidised to prepare CH3COOH ?
(c) What is the physical state of CH3COOH ?
(d) State one advantage of soaps over detergents.
Solution :
(a) CH3COOH is a c arboxylic acid.
(b) Ethanol, CH3CH2OH should be oxidised to prepare CH3COOH.
(c) Liquid state
(d) Soaps are biodegradable whereas detergents are non-biodegradable.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:264

Question 33:
(a) What happens when ethanol reacts with ethanoic acid in the presence of a little of
concentrated sulphuric acid ? Write equation of the reaction involved.
(b) What happens when ethanol is heated with concentrated sulphuric acid at 170°C ? Write
the equation of the reaction which takes place.
Solution :



Question 34:
(a) What happens when ethanol is oxidised with alkaline potassium permanganate (or
acidified potassium dichromate) ? Write the equation of the reaction involved.
(b) Choose those compounds from the following which can turn blue litmus solution red :
HCHO, CH3COOH, CH3OH, C2H5OH, HCOOH, CH3CHO Give reasons for your choice.
Solution :
(a) When ethanol is oxidised with alkaline potassium permanganate (or acidified potassium
dichromate), it gets oxidised to form ethanoic acid.
(b) CH3COOH and HCOOH can turn blue litmus solution red. These are organic acids.

Question 35:
(a) Explain the process of preparation of soap in laboratory.
(b) Why is common salt (sodium chloride) added during the preparation of soap ?
(c) Why is soap not suitable for washing clothes when the water is hard ?
Solution :
(a) Soap can be prepared in the laboratory as follows:
1. Take about 20 ml of castor oil (cottonseed oil, linseed oil or soya bean oil) in a beaker.
2. Add 30 ml of 20% sodium hydroxide solution to it.
3. Heat the mixture with constant stirring till a paste of soap is formed.
4. Then add 5 to 10 grams of common salt (sodium chloride).
5. Stir the mixture well and allow it to cool. On cooling the solution, solid soap separates out.
6. When the soap sets, it can be cut into pieces called ‘soap bars’.
(b) Common salt is added to the mixture to make the soap come out of solution. Though most
of the soap separates out on its own but some of it remains in solution. Common salt is added
to precipitate out all the soap from the aqueous solution.
(c) When soap is used for washing clothes with hard water, a large amount of soap in water is
reacting with the calcium and magnesium ions of hard water to form an insoluble precipitate
called scum, before it can be used for the real purpose of washing.

Question 36:
(a) What happens when methane (natural gas) burns in air ? Write the chemical equation of
the reaction involved.
What happens when ethanoic acid reacts with sodium carbonate ? Write chemical equation of
the reaction involved.
Give a test that can be used to differentiate chemically between butter and cooking oil.
Solution :

Question 37:
(a) Describe, giving equation, a chemical reaction which is characteristic of saturated
hydrocarbons (or alkanes).



What is an oxidising agent ? Name two oxidising agents which can oxidise ethanol to ethanoic
acid.
Describe one reaction of a carboxylic acid.
Solution :

Question 38:
(a) Write names and formulae of hydrocarbons containing a single and a double bond (one
example for each). Give one characteristic chemical property of each.
(b) What is a detergent ? Name one detergent.
(c) Why have detergents replaced soap as a washing agent ?
Solution :
(a) (i) Single bond: Methane, CH4. They are quite unreactive hence they undergo substitution
reaction with chlorine in presence of sunlight.
(ii) Double bond: Ethene, CH2=CH2. They undergo addition reaction in the presence of a
catalyst like nickel or palladium.
(b) A detergent is the sodium salt of long chain benzene sulphonic acid which has cleansing
properties in water. Ex: Sodium n-dodecyl benzene sulphonate.
(c) Detergents are better cleansing agents than soaps because they do not form insoluble
calcium and magnesium salts with hard water, and hence can be used for washing even with
hard water.

Question 39:
(a) How does ethanoic acid react with sodium hydrogencarbonate ? Give equation of the
reaction which takes place.
(b) Why are carbon and its compounds used as fuels for most applications ?
Which of the two is better for washing clothes when the water is hard : soap or detergent ?
Give reason for your answer.
Solution :

Question 40:
(a) What is meant by a substitution reaction ? Give an example (with equation) of the
substitution reaction of, an alkane.
(b) How is soap made ? Write a word equation involved in soap making.
Solution :

Question 41:
(a) How is ethanoic acid obtained from ethanol ? Write down the chemical equation of the
reaction involved.
(b) How would you distinguish between ethanol and ethanoic acid by chemical test ?



(c) Explain the formation of scum when hard water is treated with soap.
Solution :

Question 42:
(a) What happens when methane reacts with chlorine ? Give equation of the reaction which
takes place.
(b) What is hydrogenation ? What is its industrial application ?
(c) Give any two differences between soaps and detergents.
Solution :

Question 43:
(a) What happens when ethanoic acid reacts with sodium hydroxide ? Write equation of the
reaction involved.
(b) What happens when vegetable oils are hydrogenated ? Name the catalyst used.
(c) What is the advantage of detergents over soaps for washing clothes ? Also state one
disadvantage.
Solution :

Question 44:
(a) An organic compound X of molecular formula C2H4O2 gives brisk effervescence with
sodium hydrogencarbonate. Give the name and formula of X.
(b) A mixture of ethyne (acetylene) and oxygen is burnt for welding. Can you tell why a mixture
of ethyne and air is not used ?
(c) Name a chemical reaction which is characteristic of unsaturated hydrocarbons (like
alkenes and alkynes).
Solution :
(a) Ethanoic acid, CH3COOH gives brisk effervescence with sodium hydrogencarbonate.
(b) A mixture of ethyne and air is not used for welding because burning of ethyne in air
produces a sooty flame (due to incomplete combustion) which is not hot enough to melt
metals for welding.
(c) Addition reactions are a characteristic of unsaturated hydrocarbons.

Question 45:
(a) What is meant by an addition reaction ? Give an example (with equation) of an addition
reaction of an alkene.
(b) What is added to groundnut oil when it is to be converted to vanaspati ghee ?



(c) Which of the two is better for our health : butter or vegetable oil ? Why ?
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:265

Question 46:
(a) When ethanoic acid reacts with sodium hydrogencarbonate, then a salt X is formed and a
gas Y is evolved.
Name the salt X and gas Y. Describe an activity with the help of a labelled diagram of the
apparatus used to prove that the evolved gas is the one which you have named. Also write the
chemical equation of the reaction involved.
(b) Give any two uses of ethanoic acid.
Solution :
(a)Salt X is sodium ethanoate, CH3COONa; Gas Y is carbon dioxide, CO 2
Activity: Take a boiling tube and put about 0.5 g of sodium carbonate in it. Add 2 ml of dilute
ethanoic acid to the boiling tube (through a thistle funnel). We will observe that brisk
effervescence of carbon dioxide gas is produced. Let us pass this gas through lime water
taken in a test tube. We will find that lime water turns milky. Only carbon dioxide gas can turn
lime water milky. So, this experiment proves that when ethanoic acid reacts with sodium
carbonate, then carbon dioxide gas is evolved.

(b)(i) Dilute ethanoic acid (in the form of vinegar) is used as a food preservative in the
preparation of pickles and sauces.
(ii) It is used in the manufacture of acetone and esters used in perfumes.
(a) Activity:
(i) Take 1 ml of pure ethanol (absolute alcohol) in a test-tube and add 1 ml of glacial ethanoic
acid to it. Then add 2 or 3 drops of concentrated sulphuric acid to the mixture.
(ii) Warm the test-tube containing above reaction mixture in hot water bath (a beaker
containing hot water) for about 5 minutes.
(iii) Pour the contents of the test-tube in about 50 ml of water taken in another beaker and
smell it.
(iv) A sweet smell is obtained indicating the formation of an ester.
Reaction:
(c) Uses of esters:
(i) Esters are used in making artificial flavours and essences. These are used in cold drinks,
ice-creams, sweets and perfumes.
(ii) Esters are used as solvents for oils, fats, gums, resins, cellulose, paints, varnishes, etc.



Question 48:
(a) Name the reaction which is usually used in the conversion of vegetable oils to fats. Explain
the reaction
involved in detail. Write a chemical equation to illustrate your answer.
(b) What is saponification ? Write the chemical equation of the reaction involved in this
process. Name all the substances which take part in this process and also those which are
formed.
(c) Why does micelle formation take place when soap is added to water ? Will a micelle be
formed in other solvents like ethanol also ?
Solution :

Question 49:
(a) What is a soap ? Name one soap.
(b) Describe the structure of a soap molecule with the help of a diagram.
(c) Explain the cleansing action of soap. Draw diagrams to illustrate your answer.
Solution :
(a) A soap is the sodium salt (or potassium salt) of a long chain carboxylic acid (fatty acid)
which has cleansing properties in water.
Example: Sodium stearate, C H COO– +

17 35 Na

(b) A soap molecule has two parts: the long chain organic part and the ionic part containing
the -COO–Na+ group. It has to be remembered that this is not an ion, the atoms are all
covalently bonded, the electrical charges show how the charges get polarized in the group. A
soap molecule has a tadpole like structure shown below:
(c) Cleaning action of soap has been explained with the help of the image below:



Soaps are molecules in which the two ends have differing properties, one is hydrophilic, that is
it dissolves in water, while the other end is hydrophobic, that is it dissolves in hydrocarbons.
When soap is at the surface of water, the hydrophobic ‘tail’ of soap will not be soluble in water
and the soap will align along the surface of water with the ionic end in water and the
hydrocarbon ‘tail’ protruding out of water.

Inside water, these molecules have a unique orientation that keeps the hydrocarbon portion
inside the water. This is achieved by forming clusters of molecules in which the hydrophobic
tails are in the interior of the cluster and the ionic ends are on the surface of the cluster. This
formation is called a micelle. When a dirty cloth is put in water containing dissolved soap, then
soap in the form of a micelle is able to clean. The hydrocarbon ends of the soap attach to the
oily dirt particles and entrap them at the centre of the micelle. the ionic ends in the micelles
remain attached to water. When the dirty cloth is agitated in soap solution, the oily dirt
particles entrapped by soap micelles get dispersed in water and the cloth gets cleaned.

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:266

Question 66:
A neutral organic compound X of molecular formula C2H6O on oxidation with acidified
potassium dichromate gives an acidic compound Y. Compound X reacts with Y on warming in
the presence of cone. H2S04 to give a sweet smelling substance Z. What are X, Y and Z ?
Solution :
X is ethanol
Y is ethanoic acid
Z is ethyl ethanoate
Ethanol reacts with ethanoic acid to form ethyl ethanoate ester.

Question 67:
Consider the following organic compounds :
HCHO, C2H5OH, C2H6, CH3COOH, C2H5C1
Choose two compounds which can react in the presence of cone. H2S04 to form an ester. Give
the name and formula of the ester formed.
Solution :
C2H5OH and CH3COOH react in the presence of conc. H2SO4 to form an ester. Ethyl ethanoate,
CH3COOC2H5 is formed in the reaction.

Question 68:
A neutral organic compound is warmed with some ethanoic acid and a little of cone. H2S04.
Vapours having sweet smell (fruity smell) are evolved. What type of functional group is
present in this organic compound ? The structural formula of an ester is :
Solution :
Alcohol group, -OH. Acids react with alcohols to form sweet smelling esters.

Question 69:
The structural formula of an ester is :



Write the formula of the acid and the alcohol from which it is formed.
Solution :

Question 70:
Consider the following organic compounds :
CH3OH, C2H5OH, CH3COCH3, CH3COOH, C2H5COOH, C4H9COOC2H5, CH4, C2H6, CH3CHO,
HCHO Out of these compounds :
(a) Which compound is most likely to be sweet-smelling ?
(b) Which compound on treatment with cone. H2S04 at 170°C forms an alkene ?
(c) Which compound on repeated chlorination forms chloroform ?
(d) Which compound is added to alcohol to denature it ?
(e) Which compound is a constituent of vinegar ?
(f) Which compound is used to sterilise wounds and syringes ?
Solution :
(a) C4H9COOC2H5; Ester
(b) C2H5OH; Alcohol forms ethene, C2H4
(c) CH4; Methane
(d) CH3OH; Methanol
(e) CH3COOH; Acetic acid
(f) C2H5OH; Ethanol

Question 71:
An organic acid X is a liquid, Which often freezes during winter time in cold countries, having
the molecular formula C2H402. On warming it with methanol in the presence of a few drops of
concentrated sulphuric acid, a compound Y with a sweet smell is formed.
(a) Identify X and Y. Also write their formulae showing the functional group present in them.
(b) Write a chemical equation for the reaction involved.
Solution :

Question 72:
An organic compound A having the molecular formula C3H8O is a liquid at room temperature.
The organic liquid A reacts with sodium metal to evolve a gas which burns causing a little
explosion. When the organic liquid A is heated with concentrated sulphuric acid at 170°C, it
forms a compound B which decolourises bromine water. The compound B adds on one
molecule of hydrogen in the presence of Ni as catalyst to form compound C which gives
substitution reactions with chlorine.
(a) What is compound A ?
(b) What is compound B ?
(c) What type of reaction occurs when A is converted into B ?



(d) What is compound C ?
(e) What type of reaction takes place when B is converted into C ?
Solution :
(a) A is propanol, CH3-CH2-CH2OH
(b) B is propene, CH3CH=CH2
(c) Dehydration reaction
(d) C is propane, CH3CH2-CH3
(e) Addition reaction

Lakhmir Singh Chemistry Class 10 Solutions Page No:267

Question 73:
An organic compound A (molecular formula C2H402) reacts with Na metal to form a
compound B and evolves a gas which burns with a pop sound. Compound A on treatment with
an alcohol C in the presence of a little of concentrated sulphuric acid forms a sweet-smelling
compound D (molecular formula C3H602). Compound D on treatment with NaOH solution
gives back B and C. Identify A, B, C and D.
Solution :
A is ethanoic acid, CH3COOH
B is sodium ethanoate, CH3COONa
C is methanol, CH3OH
D is methyl ethanoate, CH3COOCH3

Question 74:
Which of the following hydrocarbons can decolourise bromine water and which cannot ? Why
?
C6H12, C6H14, C6H10
Solution :
C6H12 and C6H10 c an decolourise bromine water since these are unsaturated hydrocabons.
C6H14 cannot decolourise bromine water since it is a saturated hydrocarbon.

Question 75:
A four carbon atoms containing neutral organic compound X reacts with sodium metal to
evolve a gas which burns with a ‘pop’ sound. Another four carbon atoms containing carbon
compound reacts with sodium hydrogencarbonate to evolve a gas which turns lime water
milky. When compounds X and Y are heated together in the presence of a little of
concentrated sulphuric acid, then a new compound Z is formed.
(a) What is compound X ? Also write its formula.
(b) What is compound Y ? Also write its formula,.
(c) What is compound Z ? Also write its formula.
(d) What type of smell is given by compound Z ?
(e) What is the general name of compounds like Z ?
(f) What is the general name of the reaction which takes place between X and Y to form Z ?
Solution :
(a) X is butanol, C4H9OH
(b) Y is butanoic acid, C3H7COOH
(c) Z is butyl butanoate, C3H7COOC4H9
(d) Sweet smell is given by the compound Z.
(e) Esters
(f) Esterification reaction.






























 Heredity and Evolution

Question 1:
Which of the processes, sexual reproduction or asexual reproduction, brings about maximum
variations in the offsprings ?
Solution :
Sexual Reproduction

Question 2:
Name one variation in humans connected with ears.
Solution :
Free Earlobes.

Question 3:
What constitutes the link between one generation and the next ?
Solution :
Gametes.

Question 4:
If the trait A exists in 10% of a population of an asexually reproducing species and a trait B
exists in 60% of the same population, which trait is likely to have arisen earlier ?
Solution :
B.

Question 5:
Mendel said that the characteristics or traits of organisms are carried from one generation to
the next by internal factors which occur in pairs. What is the modern name for these factors ?
Solution :
Genes.

Question 6:
Some plants occur in one of the two sizes : tall or dwarf. This characteristic is controlled by

one pair of genes. Tallness is dominant to dwarfness. Choose suitable letters for this gene
pair.
Solution :
Tt.



Question 7:
What are the chromosomes XY and XX known as ?
Solution :
Sex Chromosomes.

Question 8:
Which of the two, sperm or ovum, decides the sex of the child ?
Solution :
Sperm.

Question 9:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
The sex of an infant is not a case of inheritance of characteristics.
Solution :
False.

Question 10:
A new born child has an XY pair of chromosmes. Will it be a baby boy or a baby girl ?
Solution :
Baby boy

Question 11:
Which of the following combinations of sex chromosomes produce a male child : XX or XY ?
Solution :
XY.

Question 12:
Name the first scientist who studied the inheritance of traits from one generation to the next.
Solution :
Gregor Mendel

Question 13:
What type of plants were used by Mendel for conducting his experiments on inheritance ?
Solution :
Pea plants.

Question 14:
The gene for red hair is recessive to the gene for black hair. What will be the hair colour of a
person if he inherits a gene for red hair from his mother and a gene for black hair from his
father ?
Solution :
Black hair.

Question 15:
What are the four blood groups in humans ?
Solution :
A, B, AB and O.



Question 16:
Name one reptile in each case where higher incubation temperature leads to the development
of : (a) male progeny, (b) female progeny.
Solution :
(a) Lizard (Agama agama)
(b) Turtle (Chrysema Picta)

Question 17:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Genes always work in …………………
(b) In pea plants, the gene for dwarfness is………………… whereas that for tallness is…………………
(c) Most people have………………… earlobes but some have………………… earlobes.
(d) A human gamete contains………………… chromosomes whereas a normal body cell
has………………… chromosomes in it.
(e) All races of man have………………… blood groups.
(f) The………………… chromosomes for a………………… are XX whereas that for a………………… are XY.
Solution :
(a) Pairs.
(b) Recessive; Dominant.
(c) Free; attached.
(d) 23; 46.
(e) Four.
(f) Sex; Female; male.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:192

Question 18:
Which of the following represent tall plants and which represent short plants (or dwarf plants)
?Which of the following represent tall plants and which represent short plants (or dwarf plants)
?
(a) Tt
(b) tt
(c) TT
Give reason for your choice (The symbols have their usual meaning).
Solution :
(a) Tall – Tt will have tall plants because of the presence of T which is dominant gene and t is
recessive gene.
(b) Dwarf plants: It is dwarf due to the presence of both the recessive genes.
(c) Tall plants: These plants are tall due to the presence of both the dominant genes.

Question 19:
A man having blood group O marries a woman having blood group B and they have a daughter.
What will be the blood group of the daughter ?
Solution :
Equal chance of having blood group O or blood group B.

Question 20:
a) Name the scientist who gave the laws of inheritance.
(b) Name an animal in which individuals can change sex. What does this indicate ?
Solution :
(a) Gregor Mendel
(b) Snails: This indicates that sex is not determined genetically in some animals.



Question 21:
Explain with an example, how genes control the characteristics (or traits).
Solution :
The characteristics or traits in animals and plants are controlled by genes. For example the
transmission of color of hair from the parents to the child. If a mother has black hair and the
father has blonde hair and the child has black hair then the transmission of genes for hair
colour from the mother and father to the child is as follows: Mother’s cell contains two genes
HH for black hair. Both the genes HH are dominant genes, so the mother has black hair.
Father’s cell contains two genes (hh) for blonde hair. The two genes hh are recessive genes, so
the father has blonde hair. Now, during the process of reproduction, the mother transmits one
of the dominant genes H for black hair to the child and the father transmits one of his
recessive genes h for blonde hair to the child. Due to this, the child has the genes Hh for her
hair. Now the gene H for black hair is the dominant gene but the gene h for blonde hair is the
recessive gene. The dominant gene H for black hair shows its effect due to which the child has
black hair.

Question 22:
(a) State one advantage of variation to a species.
(b) What are sex chromosomes ? How many sex chromosomes are there ? Name them.
Solution :
(a) The advantage of variation to a species is that it increases the chances of its survival in a
changing environment.
(b) The chromosomes which determine the sex of a person are called sex chromosomes.
There are two types of sex chromosomes ? X and Y chromosomes.

Question 23:
Explain how, sex is determined in human babies.
Solution :
The sex of a child depends on what happens at fertilisation:
(a) If a sperm carrying X chromosome fertilises an ovum (or egg) which carries X
chromosome, then the child born will be a girl. This is because the child will have XX
combination of sex chromosomes.
(b) If a sperm carrying Y chromosome fertilises an ovum (or egg) which carries X
chromosome, then the child born will be a boy. This is because the child will have XY
combination of sex chromosomes.

Question 24:
What do the following symbols used in the topic on heredity represent ?
(a) TT
(b) tt
(c) XX
(d) XY
Solution :
(a) Tall plant.
(b) Dwarf plant.
(c) Female.
(d) Male.

Question 25:
(a) What will you get in the F1 and F2 generations in the following cross ?
Pure tall pea plant x Pure dwarf pea plant
(b) Is it an example of monohybrid cross or dihybrid cross ?



Solution :
(a) In the F1 generation, all plants produced will be tall and in F2 generation three tall plants
and one dwarf plant will be produced.
(b) It is an example of monohybrid cross.

Question 26:
In the F2 generation of a cross, progeny having different traits are produced in the ratio 3:1.
State whether it is a monohybrid cross or a dihybrid cross ? Give one example of such a cross.
Solution :
It is a monohybrid cross. Example – when two hybrids tall Pea plants cross bred with each
other, they will produce three tall plants and one dwarf plant in F2 generation.

Question 27:
(a) What is the genotype of dwarf plants which always produced dwarf offspring ?
(b) What is the genotype of tall plants which always produced tall offspring ?
(c) What is the genotype of

1.  dwarf plants, and
2.  tall plants, whose parental cross always produces tall offspring ?

Solution :
(a) tt.
(b) TT.
(c) (i) tt
(ii) TT.

Question 28:
(a) If a normal human cell has 46 chromosomes, how many chromosomes will be there in a
human (;) sperm cell, and (ii) zygote ?
(b) What sizes of plants are produced if both parents have genes Tt ?
Solution :
(a) (i)23.
(ii) 46.
(b) Three tall plants and one dwarf plant.

Question 29:
In a human, how many chromosmes are present in :
(a) a brain cell ?
(b) a sperm in the testes ?
(c) an egg which has just been produced by the ovary ?
(d) a skin cell ?
(e) a fertilised egg ?
Solution :
(a) 46.
(b) 23.
(c) 23.
(d) 46.
(e) 46.

Question 30:
Gregor Mendel’s first law of genetics states “Of a pair of contrasted characters, only one can
be represented in a gamete by its internal ‘factor’.



(a) Give the modern name for this ‘factor’.
(b) State where these factors are found in gametes.
Solution :
(a) Genes.
(b) Chromosomes.

Question 31:
Does genetic combination of mother play a significant role in determining the sex of a new
born baby ?
Solution :
No, because mother has a pair of X chromosomes. All new born babies will inherit an X
chromosome from mother whether they are baby boys or baby girls.

Question 32:
Give the contrasting traits of the following characters in pea plant and mention which is
dominant and which is recessive :
(a) Yellow seed (b) Round seed
Solution :
(a) Green seed: Yellow is dominant: Green is recessive.
(b) Wrinkled seed: round is dominant: wrinkled is recessive.

Question 33:
(a)What is meant by ‘heredity’ ? What are the units of heredity.
(b) State Mendel’s first law of inheritance.
Solution :
(a) The transmission of characters from parents to the offspring’s is called heredity. The units
of heredity are genes.
(b) According to Mendel’s first law of inheritance: The characteristics (or traits) of an organism
are determined by internal ‘factors’ which occur in pairs. Only one of a pair of such factors can
be present in a single gamete.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:193

Question 34:
(a) Why did Mendel choose pea plants for conducting his experiments on inheritance ?
(b) State Mendel’s second law of inheritance.
Solution :
(a) Mendel choose pea plants for studying inheritance because pea plants had a number of
clear cut differences which were easy to tell apart. Another reason for choosing pea plants are
they were self pollinating and many generations can be produced in a short time span.
(b) According to Mendel’s second law of inheritance: In the inheritance of more than one pair
of traits in a cross simultaneously, the factors responsible for each pair of traits are distributed
independently to the gametes.
(c) How does the creation of variation in a species ensure its survival ?

Question 35:
(a) What do you understand by the term ‘variation’ ?
(b) Name two human traits which show variation.
Solution :
(a) The differences in the characters among the individual of a species is called variation.
(b) Human height and free ear lobe are the traits which show variation in humans.
(c) Due to the creation of variations, a species can adjust to the changing environment around



it. And this promotes the survival of the species in the changing environment. Example: The
accumulation of ‘heat resistant’ variation (or trait) in some bacteria will ensure its survival even
when the temperature in its environment rises too much due to a heat wave or some other
reasons. On the other hand, the bacteria which did not have this variation to withstand heat
would not survive under these circumstances and die.

Question 36:
(a) What are genes ? Where are they located in our body ?(a) What are genes ? Where are they
located in our body ?
(b) What is meant by dominant genes and recessive genes ? Give one example of each.
(c) Explain how, characteristics (or traits) are inherited through genes.
Solution :
(a) Genes are the units of heredity which transfer characteristic from parents to their
offspring’s during reproduction. Genes are located on the chromosomes.
(b) The gene which decides the appearance of an organism even in the presence of an
alternative gene is known as dominant gene. The gene which can decide the appearance of an
organism only in the presence of another identical gene is called a recessive gene. The
dominant gene is represented by a capital letter and the corresponding recessive gene is
represented by the corresponding small letter. For example, in pea plants, the dominant gene
for tallness is T and the recessive gene for dwarfness is t.
(c) There is a pair of genes for each characteristic of an organism, one is dominant gene and
the other is recessive gene. Each parent passes only one of the two genes of the pair for each
characteristic to its progeny through gametes. Thus, the male gamete and the female gamete
carry one gene for each characteristic from the gene pairs of the parents. When a male
gamete fuses with a female gamete during fertilisation they make a new cell called zygote
which grows and develops to form a new organism having characteristics from both the
parents which it has inherited through genes.

Question 37:
(a) How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits may be dominant or recessive ?
(b) How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits are inherited independently ?
Solution :
(a) Mendel first crossed pure bred tall pea plants with pure bred dwarf pea plants and found
that only tall pea plants were produced in the first generation. No dwarf pea plants were
obtained in F1 generation. Mendel concluded that the first generation showed the traits of only
one of the parent plants; tallness. The trait of other parent plant, dwarfness, did not show up in
the progeny of first generation. Mendel then crossed the tall pea plants of the first generation
(F1 Generation) and found that tall plants and dwarf plants were obtained in the second
generation (or F2 generation) in the ratio of 3:1. Mendel noted that the dwarf trait of the parent
pea plant which had seemingly disappeared in the first generation progeny reappeared in the
second generation. In this way, Mendel’s experiments with tall and dwarf pea plants showed
that the traits may be dominant and recessive.



(b) When Mendel crossed pure-bred tall pea plants with pure-bred dwarf pea plants, he found
that only tall pea plants were produced in the F1 generation. When Mendel further crossed the
tall pea plants of the F1 generation, he found that the tall plants and dwarf plants were
obtained in the ratio 3:1 in the F2 generation. Mendel noted that all the pea plants produced in
the F2 generation were either tall or dwarf. There were no plants with intermediate height (or
medium height) in-between the tall and dwarf plants. In this way, Mendel’s experiment showed
that the traits (like tallness and dwarfness) are inherited independently. This is because if the
traits of tallness and dwarfness had blended (or mixed up), then medium sized pea plants
would have been produced.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:208

Question 1:
What name is given to the sequence of gradual changes over millions of years in which new
species are produced ?
Solution :
Evolution.

Question 2:
Name the scientist who gave the theory of evolution.
Solution :
Charles Robert Darwin.

Question 3:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Human beings have evolved from chimpanzees.
Solution :
False.

Question 4:
State one characteristic which shows that the birds are very closely related to dinosaurs.
Solution :
The presence of feathers on birds and dinosaurs shows that they are closely related to each
other.

Question 5:
Name an animal having rudimentary eyes.
Solution :



Planaria.

Question 6:
Name the ancestor of the following :
Broccoli, Kohlrabi, Kale
Solution :
Wild Cabbage.

Question 7:
Where did life originate on the earth ?
Solution :
Sea water.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:209

Question 8:
Write the names of at least three inorganic molecules which helped in the origin of life on the
earth.
Solution :
Methane, Ammonia and Hydrogen Sulphide.

Question 9:
Name the famous book written by Charles Robert Darwin.
Solution :
The Origin of Species.

Question 10:
The forelimbs of a frog, a bird and a man show the same basic design (or basic structure) of
bones. What name is given to such organs ?
Solution :
Homologous Organs.

Question 11:
Name two organisms which are now extinct and studied from their fossils.
Solution :
Dinosaurs and Archaeopteryx.

Question 12:
Out of the wing of a bird, wing of an insect and the wing of a bat :
(a) which two are homologous organs ?
(b) which two are analogous organs ?
Solution :
(a) Wings of bird and wings of bat.
(b) Wings of birds and wings of insects.

Question 13:
Why are human beings who look so different from each other in terms of size, colour and
looks said to belong to the same species ?
Solution :
The human beings who look so different from each other in terms of size, color and looks are
set to belong to the same species because they can inter breed to produce fertile offsprings.



Question 14:
Name five varieties of vegetables which have been produced from ‘wild cabbage’ by the
process of artificial
selection.
Solution :
Cabbage, Broccoli, Cauliflower, Kohlrabi and Kale.

Question 15:
Choose the one term from the following which includes the other three :
broccoli, wild cabbage, cauliflower, cabbage
Solution :
Wild cabbage.

Question 16:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The human forelimb and bat’s forelimb are an example of……………………organs whereas an
insect’s wing and a bat’s wing are an example of…………………organs.
(b) The evolution of eye is an example of evolution by…………………
(c) The scientific name of all human beings is……………………..
(d) Broccoli has evolved from……………..by the process of artificial selection.
(e) The theory of natural selection for evolution was proposed by………………………
Solution :
(a) Homologous: Analogous.
(b) Stages.
(c) Homo sapiens.
(d) Wild Cabbage.
(e) Darwin.

Question 17:
Match the terms given in column I with those given in column II :

Solution :
(i) – c.
(ii) – b.
(iii) – e.
(iv) – a.
(v) – d.

Question 18:
What is meant by acquired and inherited traits ? Explain with one example each.
Solution :
A trait of an organism which is ‘not inherited’ but develops in response to the environment is
called an acquired trait. Example – If a beetle does not get sufficient food for a considerable
time, its weight will be reduced due to starvation. The low weight of the beetle is an example of
acquired trait. A trait of an organism which is caused by a change in its genes (DNA) is called
an inherited trait. Example – The change of colour from red beetle to green beetle is an
example of inherited trait.



Question 19:
Why are the traits acquired during the lifetime of an individual not inherited ?
Solution :
For a trait of an organism to be inherited, it should bring about a change in the genes present in
the reproductive cells or gametes of that organism. The traits acquired during the life time of a
person do not bring about a change in the genes present in its reproductive cells or gametes
and hence they are not inherited by the offsprings.

Question 20:
Can the wing of a butterfly and the wing of a bat be considered homologous organs ? Why or
why not ?
Solution :
The wings of a butterfly and the wings of a bat cannot be considered homologous because
though the function of wings in both the cases is same but they have different basic design.
The butterfly has a fold of membranes as wings which are associated with few muscles but
has no bones whereas the wings of bat are supported by bones.

Question 21:
Name two animals having homologous organs and two having analogous organs. Name these
organs.
Solution :
Forelimb of humans and forelimb of lizard are the homologous organs and the wing of insect
and the wing of bird are analogous organs.

Question 22:
What are fossils ? Giving one example, explain how fossils provide evidence for evolution.
Solution :
The remains of dead animals or plants that lived in the remote past are known as fossils. The
fossils provide evidence of evolution. For example, a fossil bird called Archaeopteryx looks like
a bird but it has many features which are found in reptiles. This is because Archaeopteryx has
feathered wings like those of birds but teeth and tail like those of reptiles. Therefore,
Archaeopteryx is a connecting link between the reptiles and birds and suggests that birds
have evolved from reptiles. Thus, fossils provide evidence that the present plants and animals
have originated from the previously existing ones through the process of continuous evolution.

Question 23:
Give an example of characteristics being used to determine how close two species are in
evolutionary terms.
Solution :
The changes in DNA during reproduction are mainly responsible for evolution. The changes
which take place in the DNA of species go on accumulating from one generation to the next.
So, if the changes in the DNA of any two species are less, then the two species are quite close
to one another in evolutionary terms. But if the changes in the DNA of two species are much
more, then the two species will be far apart from one another in evolutionary terms. Thus, it is
the characteristic of the extent of change in the DNA which is being used to determine how
close two species are in evolutionary terms.

Question 24:
In what way are homologous organs evidence for evolution ?
Solution :
The presence of homologous organs in different animals provides evidence for evolution by
telling us that they are derived from the same ancestor who had the ‘basic design’ of the organ



on which all the homologous organs are based.

Question 25:
Why are the small numbers of surviving tigers a cause of worry from the point of view of
genetics ?
Solution :
Sometimes a species may completely die out. It may become extinct. Once a species is
extinct, its genes are lost forever, it cannot reemerge at all. The small numbers of surviving
tigers are a cause of worry because if they all die out and become extinct, their genes will be
lost forever. Our coming generations will not be able to see Tigers at all.

Question 26:
Will geographical isolation be a major factor in the speciation of an organism that reproduces
asexually ? Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
Geographical isolation cannot be a major factor in the speciation of an asexually reproducing
organism because it does not require any other organism to carry out reproduction.

Question 27:
Name the various tools of tracing evolutionary relationships which have been used for
studying human evolution.
Solution :
Human evolution has been studied by using the various tools of tracing evolutionary
relationships like excavating (digging earth), carbon-dating, studying fossils and determining
DNA sequences.

Question 28:
Out of bacteria, spider, fish and chimpanzee, which organism has a better body design in
evolutionary terms ? Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
In evolutionary terms, we can say that bacteria has a ‘better’ body design than spiders, fish,
and, chimpanzees. This is because though bacteria is one of the simplest and primitive life
forms but it still inhabits and survives in some of the most inhospitable (most unfavourable)
habitats such as hot springs, deep-sea thermal vents and ice in Antarctica. Most other
organisms (including spider, fish and chimpanzees) cannot survive in such harsh
environments.

Question 29:
With the help of an example, explain how variation leads to evolution.
Solution :
Some amount of variations are produced even during asexual reproduction but it is very small.
The number of variations produced during sexual reproduction is, however, very large. It is due
to these variations that no two human beings look alike. The number of successful variations
is maximized by the process of sexual reproduction, so we can conclude that the variation is a
necessity for organic evolution. Example: Animal reproduced by sexual reproduction show
large number of variations.

Question 30:
(a) What is meant by a species ? Give two examples of plant species and two of animals.
(b) State the various factors which could lead to the formation of new species.
Solution :
(a) A species is a population of organisms consisting of similar individuals which can breed



together and produce fertile offspring’s. Plant species – Wheat, Paddy, Sunflower etc. Animal
species – Cat, Dog, Tiger, etc.
(b) The important factors which could lead to the rise (or formation) of a new species are the
following:

1. Geographical isolation of a population caused by various types of barriers (such as
mountain ranges, rivers and sea). The geographical isolation leads to reproductive
isolation due to which there is no flow of genes between separated groups of
population.

2. Genetic drift caused by drastic changes in the frequencies of particular genes by chance
alone.

3. Variations caused in individuals due to natural selection.

Question 31:
What evidence do we have for the origin of life from inanimate matter (lifeless matter) ?
Solution :
The evidence was given by Stanley L. Miller and Harold C. Urey in 1953. They assembled an
apparatus to create an early earth atmosphere which was supposed to consist of gases like
ammonia, methane and hydrogen sulphide, but no oxygen) over water. This was maintained
by them at a temperature just below 100o C and electric sparks were passed through the
mixture of gases to stimulate lightning. At the end of a week, they found that 15% of the
carbon (from methane) had been converted to simple compounds of carbon including amino
acids which make up protein molecules.

Question 32:
Does geographical isolation of individuals of a species lead to the formation of a new species ?
Provide a suitable explanation for your answer.
Solution :
Geographical isolation is the major factor in the speciation of sexually reproducing animals
because it interrupts the flow of genes between their isolated populations through the
gametes.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:210

Question 33:
Bacteria have a simpler body plan when compared with human beings. Does it mean that
human beings are more evolved than bacteria ? Explain your answer.
Solution :
Bacteria have simpler body plan when compared with human beings. Both of them have
evolved differently. Bacteria can inhabit most of the unfavourable habitats such as hot springs,
deep- sea thermal vents and the ice in Antarctica.

Question 34:
(a) Name the scientist who gave the theory of origin of life on earth. What is this theory ?
(b) How are those species which are now ‘extinct’ studied ?
Solution :
(a) The theory of origin of life on earth was given by J.B.S Haldane. He suggested in 1929 that
life must have developed from the simple inorganic molecules (such as methane, ammonia,
hydrogen sulphide, etc.) which were present on the earth soon after it was formed. He said
that the conditions on earth at that time (including frequent lightning) could have converted
simple inorganic molecules into complex organic molecules which were necessary for life.
These complex organic molecules must have joined together to form first primitive living



organisms. Haldane also suggested from theoretical considerations that life (or living
organisms) originated in the sea water.
(b) Those species which are now extinct are studied by studying their fossils which are found
during the digging of earth.

Question 35:
What do you understand by the term ‘evolution’ ? State Darwin’s theory of evolution.
Solution :
Evolution is the sequence of gradual changes that takes place in the primitive organisms over
millions of year in which new species are produced. Darwin’s theory of evolution is known as
‘The Theory of Natural Selection’. It can be described as follows:

1. Within any population there is natural variation. Some individuals have more favourable
variations than others.

2. Even though all species produce a large number of offspring’s, populations remain fairly
constant naturally.

3. This is due to the struggle between members of the same species and different species
for food, space and mate.

4. The struggle for survival within populations eliminates the unfit individuals. The fit
individuals possessing favourable variations survive and reproduce. This is called natural
selection.

5. The individuals having favourable variations pass on these variations to their progeny
from generation to generation.

6. These variations when accumulated over a long period of time, lead to the origin of a
new species.

Question 36:
(a) Explain the terms ‘analogous organs’ and ‘homologous organs’ with examples.
(b) In what way are analogous organs evidence for evolution ?
Solution :
(a) Analogous Organs: Organs which performs similar function but are different in structure
and origin. Example – wings of a bird and wings of an insect. Homologous Organ: Organs
which have different functions but similar structure and origin. Example – fore arm of frog,
lizard, bird and human.
(b) The presence of analogous organs indicates that even the organisms having organs with
different structures can adapt to perform similar functions for their survival under hostile
environmental conditions. Thus, the presence of analogous organs in different animals
provide evidence for evolution by telling us that though they are not derived from common
ancestors, they can still evolve to perform similar functions to survive, flourish and keep on
evolving in the prevailing environment.

Question 37:
(a) Define ‘speciation’. Explain how speciation occurs.
(b) Will geographical isolation be a major factor in the speciation of a self-pollinating plant
species ? Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
(a) The process by which new species develop from the existing species is known as
speciation. New species are formed when the population of same species splits into two
separate groups which then get isolated from each other geographically by the barriers such
as mountain ranges, rivers or the sea. The geographical isolation of the two groups of
population leads to their reproductive isolation due to which no genes are exchanged between
them. However, breeding continues within the isolated populations producing more and more



generations. Over the generations, the processes of genetic drift (random change in gene
frequency), and natural selection operate in different ways in the two isolated groups of
population and make them more and more different from each other. After thousands of
years, the individuals of these isolated groups of population become so different that they will
be incapable of reproducing with each other even if they happen to meet again. We then say
that two new species have been formed.
(b) Geographical isolation will not be a major factor in the speciation of a self pollinating plant
because it does not depend on other plants for its process of reproduction to be carried out.

Question 38:
(a) Define ‘natural selection’.
(b) “Only variations that confer an advantage to an individual organism will survive in a
population”. Do you agree with this statement ? Give reason for your answer.
Solution :
(a) Natural selection is the process of evolution of a species whereby characteristics which
help individual organisms to survive and reproduce are passed on to their offspring, and those
characteristics which do not help are not passed on.
(b) Yes, only those variations that confer advantage to an individual organism will survive in a
population. This will become clear from the following example. Suppose there is a population
of red beetles in the green bushes and a colour variation arises during reproduction so that one
beetle is now green in colour (instead of red). This variation offers advantage of survival
because the green beetle can mix up with green bushes, it cannot be spotted and eaten up by a
crow and hence its population will increase. If, however, the variation had produced a blue
coloured beetle, then this colour could not offer any survival advantage because blue beetle in
green bushes could be easily spotted by a crow and eaten by it.



Reflection of Light

Question 1:
What happens when a ray of light falls normally (or perpendicularly) on the surface of a plane
mirror ?
Solution :
As ray of light falls normally on mirror, this means that angle of incidence is 0o. From second
law of reflection, we know that angle of incidence is equal to angle of reflection. So, angle of
reflection will also be zero. Therefore, the light ray will be reflected back along the same path.

Question 2:
A ray of light is incident on a plane mirror at an angle of 30°. What is the angle of reflection ?
Solution :
According to the second law of reflection, angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection.
Therefore, angle of reflection=300

Question 3:
A ray of light strikes a plane mirror at an angle of 40° to the mirror surface. What will be the
angle of reflection ?
Solution :
Angle to the mirror surface=400

Therefore, angle of incidence= 900-400=500

According to the second law of reflection, angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection.
Therefore, angle of reflection=500

Question 4:
A ray of light is incident normally on a plane mirror. What will be the :
(a) angle of incidence ?
(b) angle of reflection ?
Solution :
(a) 00

(b) 00



Question 5:
What type of image is formed :
(a) in a plane mirror ?
(b) on a cinema screen ?
Solution :
(a) Virtual image
(b) Real image

Question 6:
What kind of mirror is required for obtaining a virtual image of the same size as the object ?
Solution :
Plane mirror.

Question 7:
What is the name of the phenomenon in which the right side of an object appears to be the left
side of the image in a plane mirror ?
Solution :
Lateral inversion.

Question 8:
Name the phenomenon responsible for the following effect:
When we sit in front of a plane mirror and write with our right hand, it appears in the mirror that
we are writing with the left hand.
Solution :
Lateral inversion.

Question 9:
If an object is placed at a distance of 10 cm in from of a plane mirror, how far would it be from
its image ?
Solution :
The image is formed behind the mirror at the same distance as the object is kept in front of
the mirror.
Given distance between object and mirror=10cm.
Distance between mirror and image=10cm.
Therefore, the distance between object and image=10+10=20cm.

Question 10:
Which property of light makes a pencil cast a shadow when it is held in front of a light source ?
Solution :
Light travels in straight lines.

Question 11:
The image seen in a plane mirror cannot be formed on a screen. What name is given to this
type of image ?
Solution :
Virtual image.

Question 12:
Fill in the following blank with a suitable word :
When light is reflected, the angles of incidence and reflection are…………
Solution :
Equal.



Question 13:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
A student says that we can see an object because light from our eyes is reflected back by the
object.
Solution :
False.

Question 14:
Where is the image when you look at something in a mirror ?
Solution :
At the back side of mirror.

Question 15
A ray of light strikes a plane mirror such that its angle of incidence is 30°. What angle does the
reflected ray make with the mirror surface ?
Solution :
According to the second law of reflection, angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection.
Given angle of incidence=300

Therefore, angle of reflection=300

Angle made by the reflected ray with mirror surface=900-300=600

Question 16:
What is the difference between a real image and a virtual image ? Give one example of each
type of image.
Solution :
Real image can be obtained on a screen because light rays actually pass through a real image
but virtual image cannot be formed on screen because light rays do not actually pass through
a virtual image.
Example:-
The image formed on a cinema screen is an example of real image.
The image formed by a plane mirror is a virtual image.

Question 17:
The letter F is placed in front of a plane mirror :
How would its image look like when seen in a plane mirror ?
What is the name of the phenomenon involved ?
Solution :

Question 18:
What is lateral inversion ? Explain by giving a suitable example.
Solution :
When an object is placed in front of a plane mirror, then the right side of the object appears to
become the left side of the image; and the left side of the object appears to become right side
of the image. This change of the sides of an object and its mirror image is called lateral
inversion.
Ex. When we hold a placard having the word RED written on it, as given in fig A, in the front of a
plane mirror, the image of the word RED will be as given in fig B.



Question 19:
Write the word AMBULANCE as it would appear when reflected in a plane mirror. Why is it
sometimes written in this way (as its mirror image) on the front of an ambulance ?
Solution :

Question 20:
What are the important differences between looking at a photograph of your face and looking
at yourself in a plane mirror ?
Solution :
A image of our face in a plane mirror is laterally inverted, so left is right and right is left.
However, in a photograph of our face this is not the case.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:174

Question 21:
(a) A wall reflects light and a mirror also reflects light. What difference is there in the way they
reflect light ?
(b) Which type of reflection of light leads to the formation of images ?
Solution :
(a) A wall has a rough surface, so the reflection by a wall is a diffuse reflection. A parallel beam
of light incident on it is reflected in different directions.
A mirror surface is smooth, so the reflection by a mirror is a regular reflection. A parallel beam
of light incident on it, gets scattered by making reflected rays in different directions.
(b) Regular reflection

Question 22:
What is the difference between regular reflection of light and diffuse reflection of light ? What
type of reflection of light takes place from :
(a) a cinema screen (b) a plane mirror (c) a cardboard (d) still water surface of a lake
Solution :
In regular reflection, a parallel beam of incident light is reflected as a parallel beam in one
direction; while in diffuse reflection, a parallel beam of incident light is reflected in different
directions.
(a) Regular reflection
(b) Regular reflection
(c) Diffuse reflection
(d) Regular reflection

Question 23:
What can you see in a completely dark room ? If you switch on an electric bulb in this dark



room as a light source, explain how you could now see :
(a) the electric bulb.
(b) a piece of white paper.
Solution :
When we see in a completely dark room, we are not able to see anything because there is no
light in the dark room.
(a) We can see bulb due to the light emitted by the bulb.
(b) We can see a piece of white paper because it reflects the light from the bulb falling on it.

Question 24:
(a) A boy with a mouth 5 cm wide stands 2 m away from a plane mirror. Where is his image
and how wide is the image of his mouth ?
(b) The boy walks towards the mirror at a speed of 1 m/s. At what speed does his image
approach him ?
Solution :
(a) The image will form 2 m behind the mirror and the width of the image of boy’s mouth will
be 5 cm.
(b) When the boy walks towards the mirror at a speed of 1 m/s, his image will also appear to
move towards the mirror at the same speed of 1 m/s. So, the speed at which his image
approach him will be 2 m/s + 2 m/s = 4 m/s.

Question 25:
(a) An extended object in the form of an arrow pointing upward has been placed in front of a
plane mirror. Draw a labelled ray-diagram to show the formation of its image.
(b) State the uses of plane mirrors.
Solution :

(b) Uses of Plane mirrors:
(i) Plane mirrors are used to see ourselves. The mirrors on our dressing table and in
bathrooms are plane mirrors.
(ii) Plane mirrors are fitted at blind turns of some busy roads so that drivers can see the
vehicles coming from the other side and prevent accidents.
(iii) Plane mirrors are used to make periscopes.
(iv) Plane mirrors are fixed on the inside walls of certain shops to make them look bigger.

Question 26:
What is meant by ‘reflection of light’ ? Define the following terms used in the study of reflection
of light by drawing a labelled ray-diagram :



(a) Incident ray
(b) Point of incidence
(c) Normal
(d) Reflected ray
(e) Angle of incidence
(f) Angle of reflection
Solution :
The process of sending back the light rays which fall on the surface of an object is called
reflection of light.

(a) Incident ray: The ray of light that falls on the mirror surface is called the incident ray.
(b) Point of incidence: The point at which the incident ray falls on the mirror is called the point
of incidence.
(c) Normal: The normal is a line at right angle to the mirror surface at the point of incidence.
(d) Reflected ray: The ray of light which is sent back by the mirror is called the reflected rays.
(e) Angle of incidence: The angle of incidence is the angle made by the incident ray with the
normal at the point of incidence.
(f) Angle of reflection: The angle of reflection is the angle made by the reflected ray with the
normal at the point of incidence.

Question 27:
State and explain the laws of reflection of light at a plane surface (like a plane mirror), with the
help of a labelled ray-diagram. Mark the angles of ‘incidence’ and ‘reflection’ clearly on the
diagram. If the angle of reflection is 47.5°, what will be the angle of incidence ?
Solution :
Laws of reflection of light:



First law of reflection: According to the first law of reflection, the incidence ray, the reflected
ray and the normal (at the point of incidence), all lie in the same plane. For e.g., in the figure,
the incident ray AO, the reflected ray OB and the normal ON, all lie in the same plane, the plane
of paper.
Second law of reflection: According to the second law of reflection, the angle of reflection is
always equal to the angle of incidence. For e.g., if we measure the angle of reflection NOB in
the figure, we will find that it is exactly equal to the angle of incidence AON.
If the angle of reflection is 47.5o, the angle of incidence will also be 47.5o in accordance with
the second law of reflection.

Question 28:
With the help of a labelled ray-diagram, describe how a plane mirror forms an image of a point
source of light placed in front of it. State the characteristics of the image formed in a plane
mirror.
Solution :

Cosider a point source of light O placed in front of a plane mirror MM’. a ray of light OA coming
from O in incident at point A on the mirror and gets reflected in the direction AX according to
the laws of reflection of light. Another ray of light OB coming from O strikes the mirror ar point
B and gets reflected in the direction BY. Rays AX and BY, on producing backwards, meet at
point I behind the mirror; which is the image of point source O.
Characteristics of image formed in a plane mirror:
(i) The image formed in a plane mirror is virtual. It cannot be received on a screen.
(ii) The image formed in a plane mirror is erect. It is the same side up as the object.
(iii) The image in a plane mirror is of the same size as the object.
(iv) The image formed by a plane mirror is at the same distance behind the mirror as the
object is in front of the mirror.
(v) The image formed by a plane mirror is laterally inverted.



Question 29:
(a) Explain why, though both a plane mirror and a sheet of paper reflect light but we can see
the image of our face in a plane mirror but not in a sheet of paper.
(b) The image in a plane mirror is virtual and laterally inverted. What does this statement mean
?
(c) Write all the capital letters of the alphabet which look the same in a plane mirror.
Solution :
(a) We can see the image of our face in a plane mirror but not in a sheet of paper because
images are formed by regular reflection of light and in case of a plane mirror, regular reflection
takes place; while in case of a sheet of paper, diffuse reflection takes place.
(b) The image is virtual and laterally inverted means it cannot be obtained on a screen and is
reversed sideways.
(c) A, H, I, M, O

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:175

Question 36:
A man stands 10 m in front of a large plane mirror. How far must he walk before he is 5 m
away from his image ?
Solution :
Initially, the distance between the man and the mirror is 10m.
So, the distance between man and his image is 10+10=20m
Distance between the man and his image is 5 m when the man is 2.5 m away from the mirror.
Therefore, he has to walk 10 m – 2.5m = 7.5 m towards the mirror

Question 37:
An object is placed 20 cm in front of a plane mirror. The mirror is moved 2 cm towards the
object. The distance between the positions of the original and final images seen in the mirror is
:
(a) 2 cm, (b) 4 cm (c) 10 cm (d) 22 cm
Solution :
Initially, the object is placed 20 cm in front of mirror. So the image will form 20 cm behind the
mirror.
If mirror is moved 2 cm towards the object,
distance between object and mirror = 20 cm – 2 cm = 18 cm
distance between mirror and image = 18 cm, which is 2 cm less than the initial case.
Since, the mirror has also moved 2 cm away from the position of original image, so the total
distance between the positions of the original and final images is 2 cm + 2 cm = 4 cm

Question 38:
A man sits in an optician’s chair, looking into a plane mirror which is 2 m away from him and
views the image of a chart which faces the mirror and is 50 cm behind his head. How far away
from his eyes does the chart appear to be ?
Solution :
Distance between the man and the mirror = 2 cm
Distance between man and chart = 50 cm = 0.5 m
Distance between chart and mirror = 0.5 m + 2 m = 2.5 m
Distance between mirror and the image of the chart = 2.5 m
Distance between man and the image of chart = Distance between man and the mirror +
Distance between mirror and the image of the chart = 2 m + 2.5 m = 4.5 m



Question 39:
A ray of light strikes a plane mirror PQ at an angle of incidence of 30°, is reflected from the
plane mirror and then strikes a second plane mirror QR placed at right angles to the first
mirror. The angle of reflection at the second mirror is :
(a) 30° (b) 45° (c) 60° (d) 90°
Draw a ray-diagram to illustrate your answer.
Solution :

Ray AB strikes the mirror PQ at B and gets reflected along BC according to the laws of
reflection. The ray BC incident on mirror QR makes an angle of 30o with the mirror. So, the
angle of incidence on this mirror is 90o-30o=60o. Hence, the angle of reflection is also 60o.

Question 40:
Explain how to read the following message which was found on some blotting paper :

Solution :
The impression on blotting paper is the mirror image of the written massage. Therefore, to
read this message we need to hold the written message in front of a mirror so that the mirror
produces a laterally inverted image of this message.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:178

Question 1:
Name the spherical mirror which has :
virtual principal focus.
real principal focus.
Solution :
(a) Convex mirror (b) Concave mirror

Question 2:
Out of convex mirror and concave mirror, whose focus is situated behind the mirror ?
Solution :
Convex mirror

Question 3:
Find the focal length of a concave mirror whose radius of curvature is 32 cm.
Solution :
Radius of curvature (R) = 32cm
Focal length (f) = ?
We know that
f = R/2
=32/2
f = 16cm



Question 4:
If the focal length of a convex mirror is 25 cm, what is its radius of curvature ?
Solution :
Focal length (f) = 25 cm
Radius of curvature (R) = ?
We know that
f = R/2
25=R/2
R= 25 x 2
R = 50 cm.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:179

Question 5:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
Parallel rays of light are reflected by a concave mirror to a point called the………..
The focal length of a concave mirror is the distance from the………. to the mirror.
A concave mirror…….. rays of light whereas a convex mirror……… rays of light.
For a convex mirror, parallel rays of light appear to diverge from a point called the…………
Solution :
(a) principal focus.
(b) principle focus.
(c) converges; diverges.
(d) principle focus.

Question 6:
What is a spherical mirror ? Distinguish between a concave mirror and a convex mirror.
Solution :
A spherical mirror is that mirror whose reflecting surface is the part of a hollow sphere of
glass. The spherical mirrors are of two types: concave mirrors and convex mirrors.
Difference between concave mirror and convex mirror:
A concave mirror is that spherical mirror in which the reflection of light takes place at concave
surface (or bent-in surface), whereas a convex mirror is that spherical miror in which the
reflection of light takes place at the convex surface (or bulging out surface).
Concave mirror converges the parallel rays of light that fall on it, whereas convex mirror
diverges the parallel rays of light that fall on it.

Question 7:
Name the two types of spherical mirrors. What type of mirror is represented by the :
(a) back side of a shining steel spoon ?
(b) front side of a shining steel spoon ?
Solution :
Two types of spherical mirrors are:
(i) Concave mirror
(ii) Convex mirror
Type of mirror represented by the:
(a) back side of a shining steel spoon – convex mirror
(b) front side of a shining steel spoon – concave mirror

Question 8:
What is the relation between the focal length and radius of curvature of a spherical mirror
(concave mirror or convex mirror) ? Calculate the focal length of a spherical mirror whose



radius of curvature is 25 cm.
Solution :
For a spherical mirror the principal focus (F) lies exactly mid-way between the pole (P) and
centre of curvature (C). So, the focal length (f) of a spherical mirror is equal to half of its radius
of curvature (R).
f=R/2
R= 25cm (Given)
f=?
We know that
f=R/2
=25/2
f =12.5cm

Question 9:
Explain with a suitable diagram, how a concave mirror converges a parallel beam of light rays.
Mark clearly the pole, focus and centre of curvature of concave mirror in this diagram.
Solution :

All the light rays which are parallel to the principal axis of a concave mirror, converge at the the
principal focus (F) after reflection from the mirror. Since a concave mirror converges a parallel
beam of light rays, it is also called a converging mirror.

Question 10:
Describe with a suitable diagram, how a convex mirror diverges a parallel beam of light rays.
Mark clearly the pole, focus and centre of curvature of convex mirror in this diagram.
Solution :

All the light rays which are parallel to the principal axis of a convex mirror, appear to diverge
from the principal focus (F) after reflection from the mirror. Since a convex mirror diverges a
parallel beam of light rays, it is also called a diverging mirror.

Question 11:
Define (a) centre of curvature (b) radius of curvature (c) pole (d) principal axis, and (e) aperture,
of a spherical mirror with the help of a labelled diagram.
Solution :



(a) Centre of curvature: Centre of curvature of a spherical mirror is the centre of the hollow
sphere of glass of which the mirror is a part.
(b) Radius of curvature: Radius of curvature of a spherical mirror is the radius of the hollow
sphere of glass of which the mirror is a part.
(c) Pole: The centre of a spherical mirror is called its pole.
(d) Principal axis: The straight line passing through the centre of curvature and pole of a
spherical mirror is called its principal axis.
(e) Aperture: The portion of a mirror from which the reflection of light actually takes place is
called the aperture of the mirror.

Question 12:
(a) Define (i) principal focus of a concave mirror, and (ii) focal length of a concave mirror.
Draw diagram to represent the action of a concave mirror on a beam of parallel light rays.
Mark on this diagram principal axis, focus F, centre of curvature C, pole P and focal length ƒ, of
the concave mirror.
Solution :
(a) (i) Principal focus of a concave mirror: The principal focus of a concave mirror is a point on
its principal axis to which all the light rays which are parallel and close to the axis, converge
after reflection from the concave mirror.
(ii) Focal length of a concave mirror: The focal length of a concave mirror is the distance
between its pole and the principal focus.
(b)

Question 13:
(a) What is meant by (i) principal focus of a convex mirror, and (ii) focal length of a convex
mirror ?
(b) Draw diagram to show the action of convex mirror on a beam of parallel light rays. Mark on
this diagram principal axis, focus F, centre of curvature C, pole P and focal length ƒ, of the
convex mirror.
Solution :
(a) (i) Principal focus of a convex mirror: The principal focus of a convex mirror is a point on its
principal axis from which a beam of light rays, initially parallel to the axis, appears to diverge
after being reflected from the convex mirror.



(ii) Focal length of a concave mirror: The focal length of a convex mirror is the distance from
the pole (P) to its principal focus (F).
(b)

Question 19:
A communications satellite in orbit sends a parallel beam of signals down to earth. If these
signals obey the same laws of reflection as light and are to be focussed onto a small receiving
aerial, what should be the best shape of the metal ‘dish’ used to collect them ?
Solution :
Concave metal dish: It will collect the parallel beam of satellite signals at its focus where
receiving aerial is fixed.

Question 20:
When a spherical mirror is held towards the sun and its sharp image is formed on a piece of
carbon paper for some time, a hole is burnt in the carbon paper.
(a) What is the nature of spherical mirror ?
(b) Why is a hole burnt in the carbon paper ?
(c) At which point of the spherical mirror the carbon paper is placed ?
(d) What name is given to the distance between spherical mirror and carbon paper ?
(e) What is the advantage of using a carbon paper rather than a white paper ?
Solution :
(a) Concave mirror
(b) A lot of sun’s heat rays are concentrated at the point of sun’s image which burn the hole in
carbon paper.
(c) At the focus.
(d) Focal length.
(e) A black carbon paper absorbs more heat rays and hence burns a hole more easily (than a
white paper).

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:189

Question 1:
For what position of an object, a concave mirror forms a real image equal in size to the object
?
Solution :
At the centre of curvature.

Question 2:
Where should an object be placed in front of the concave mirror so as to obtain its virtual,
erect and magnified image ?
Solution :



Between pole and focus.

Question 3:
For which positions of the object does a concave mirror produce an inverted, magnified and
real image ?
Solution :
Between focus and centre of curvature.

Question 4:
If an object is placed at the focus of a concave mirror, where is the image formed ?
Solution :
At infinity.

Question 5:
If an object is at infinity (very large distance) in front of a concave mirror, where is the image
formed ?
Solution :
At focus.

Question 6:
For what position of an object, a real and diminished image is formed by a concave mirror ?
Solution :
Beyond the centre of curvature.

Question 7:
Copy this figure in your answer book and show the direction of the light ray after reflection :

Solution :

Lakhmir-Singh-Physics-Class-10-Solutions-Chapter-4-
Reflection-Of-light-Q-7-Page-189

Direction of light fay after reflection.

Question 8:
Draw the following diagram in your answer book and show the formation of image of the
object AB with the help of suitable



Solution :

Question 9:
Draw the following diagram in your answer book and show the formation of image with the
help of suitable rays

Solution :

Fig. formation of image of AC.

Question 10:
Which type of mirror could be used as a dentist’s mirror ?
Solution :
Concave mirror.

Question 11:
Which kind of mirror is used in the headlights of a car ? Why is it used for this purpose ?
Solution :
Concave mirror is used in the headlights of a car. This is because when a lighted bulb is placed
at the focus of a concave mirror reflector, then the diverging light rays of the bulb are collected
by the concave reflector and then reflected to produce a strong, parallel-sided beam of light
(which travels a considerable distance in the darkness of night).



Question 12:
Explain why, a ray of light passing through the centre of curvature of a concave mirror gets
reflected back along the same path.
Solution :
A ray of light passing through the centre of curvature of a concave mirror is reflected back
along the same path because it strikes the concave mirror at right angles to its surface due to
which the angle of incidence and angle of reflection both are oo.

Question 13:
What is the minimum number of rays required for locating the image formed by a concave
mirror for an object ? Draw a ray diagram to show the formation of a virtual image by a
concave mirror.
Solution :
Minimum two rays are required for locating the image formed by a concave mirror for an
object.
Ray diagram for the formation of a virtual image by a concave mirror:

Question 14:
With the help of a ray diagram, determine the position, nature and size of the image formed of
an object
placed at the centre of curvature of a concave mirror.
Solution :
When an object is placed at the centre of curvature (C) of a concave mirror, the image formed
is:
(i) at the centre of curvature (C),
(ii) real and inverted,
(iii) of same size as the object.

Question 15:
Describe with the help of a diagram, the nature, size and position of the image formed when an
object is placed beyond the centre of curvature of a concave mirror.
Solution :
When an object is placed beyond the centre of curvature (C) of a concave mirror, the image is:
(i) between the focus and centre of curvature,
(ii) real and inverted,
(iii) smaller than the object (or diminished).

Question 16:
If an object is placed at a distance of 8 cm from a concave mirror of focal length 10 cm,
discuss the nature of the image formed by drawing the ray diagram.
Solution :
The focal length of the mirror is PF = 10 cm.
The object is placed at B such that PB = 8 cm. This means that the object lies between the



pole and focus of the concave mirror.
The image formed is virtual, erect and magnified.

Question 17:
Draw a ray diagram showing how a concave mirror can be used to produce a real, inverted and
diminished image of an object.
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:190

Question 18:
Which mirror is used as a torch reflector ? Draw a labelled diagram to show how a torch
reflector can be used to produce a parallel beam of light. Where is the bulb placed in relation to
the torch reflector ?
Solution :
Concave mirror is used for a torch reflector.
Diagram:
Bulb is placed at the focus of the torch reflector.

Question 19:
State where an object must be placed so that the image formed by a concave mirror is :
(a) erect and virtual.
(b) at infinity.
(c) the same size as the object.
Solution :
(a) Between pole and focus of the mirror.
(b) At the focus of the mirror.
(c) At the centre of curvature of the mirror.

Question 20:
With the help of a labelled ray diagram, describe how a converging mirror can be used to give
an enlarged upright image of an object.
Solution :

For obtaining an enlarged upright image of an object, the object is placed between focus (F)



and pole (P) of the concave mirror.
A ray AD parallel to the principal axis, gets reflected at D and then passes through the focus F.
A second ray AE passing through the centre of curvatue C strikes the mirror normally at point
E and gets reflected back along the same path.
Now, two reflected rays DF and EC are diverging rays and, therefore, do not intersect each
other on the left side. The reflected rays DF and EC are produced backwards (as shown by
dotted lines). On producing backwards, they appear to intersect at point A’ behind the concave
mirror. Thus, A’ is the virtual image of point A of the object. To get the complete image of the
object we draw A’B’ perpendicular to the axis. Thus, A’B’ is the image of the object AB formed
by the concave mirror. The image is bigger in size than the object, hence it is an enlarged
image.

Question 21:
Make labelled ray diagrams to illustrate the formation of :
(a) a real image by a converging mirror.
(b) a virtual image by a converging mirror.
Mark clearly the pole, focus, centre of curvature and position of object in each case.
Solution :

Question 22:
Briefly describe how you would find the focal length of a concave mirror quickly but
approximately.
Solution :
When the object is at a considerable distance (or at infinity) from a concave mirror, then its
image is formed at the focus. This fact can be used to find out the focal length of a concave
mirror quickly but approximately.
We focus a distant object (several metres away) like a window or tree on a screen by using a
concave mirror whose focal length is to be determined. The sharp image of window or tree will
be formed at the focus of the concave mirror. That is, the distance of image (or screen) from
the concave mirror will be equal to the focal length of concave mirror. This distance can be
measured with a scale. It will give us the approximate focal length of the concave mirror.

Question 23:



Which type of mirror is used in a solar furnace ? Support your answer with reason.
Solution :
Concave mirror is used in a solar furnace.
The solar furnace is placed at the focus of a large concave reflector. When parallel rays of light
from the sun fall on the surface of the concave mirror, rays gets reflected and meet at the
focus of the mirror due to the converging nature of concave mirror. Thus, the furnace kept at
the focus becomes very hot. Even steel can be melted in this furnace.

Question 24:
Name the type of mirror used by dentists. How does it help ?
Solution :
Concave mirror is used by dentists.
The dentist holds a small concave mirror in such a way that the tooth lies within its focus. A
magnified image of the tooth is then seen by the dentist in the concave mirror. Since the tooth
looks much bigger, it becomes easy to examine the defect in the tooth.

Question 25:
Explain why, concave mirrors are used as shaving mirrors.
Solution :
Concave mirrors are used as shaving mirrors. This is because when the face is placed close to
a concave mirror (so that the face is within its focus) the concave mirror produces a
magnified and erect image of the face. Since a large image of the face is seen in the concave
mirror, it becomes easier to make a smooth shave.

Question 26:
Give two uses of concave mirrors. Explain why you would choose concave mirrors for these
uses.
Solution :
Uses of concave mirror
(i) Concave mirrors are used as shaving mirrors. This is because when the face is placed close
to a concave mirror (so that the face is within its focus) the concave mirror produces a
magnified and erect image of the face. Since a large image of the face is seen in the concave
mirror, it becomes easier to make a smooth shave.
(ii) Concave mirrors are used by dentists to see the large images of the teeth of patients. This
is because when a tooth is within the focus of a concave mirror, then an enlarged image of the
tooth is seen in the mirror. Due to this, it becomes easier to locate the defect in the tooth.

Question 27:
(a) Draw ray-diagrams to show the formation of images when the object is placed in front of a
concave
mirror (converging mirror) :
(i) between its pole and focus
(ii) between its centre of curvature and focus Describe the nature, size and position of the
image formed in each case.
(b) State one use of concave mirror based on the formation of image as in case (z) above.
Solution :



Question 28:
(a) Give two circumstances in which a concave mirror can form a magnified image of an
object placed in
front of it. Illustrate your answer by drawing labelled ray diagrams for both.
(b) Which one of these circumstances enables a concave mirror to be used as a shaving
mirror ?
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:191

Question 37:
An object is 100 mm in front of a concave mirror which produces an upright image (erect
image). The radius of curvature of the mirror is :
(a) less than 100 mm



(b) between 100 mm and 200 mm
(c) exactly 200 mm
(d) more than 200 mm
Solution :
Since the image formed is upright, the object lies within the focus of the concave mirror.
So, f > 100 mm
We know R = 2f
So, R > 200 mm
i.e. Radius of curvature is more than 200 mm.

Question 38:
A virtual, erect and magnified image of an object is to be produced with a concave mirror of
focal length 12 cm. Which of the following object distance should be chosen for this purpose ?
(i) 10 cm (ii) 15 cm (iii) 20 cm
Give reasons for your choice.
Solution :
10 cm, because if the object is placed between the pole and focus of the concave mirror only
then the image formed is virtual, erect and magnified.

Question 39:
A concave mirror has a focal length of 25 cm. At which of the following distance should a
person hold his face from this concave mirror so that it may act as a shaving mirror ?
(a) 45 cm (b) 20 cm (c) 25 cm (d) 30 cm
Give reason for your choice.
Solution :
20 cm, because if the object is placed between the pole and focus of the concave mirror only
then the image formed is erect and magnified.

Question 40:
An object is placed at the following distances from a concave mirror of focal length 15 cm,
turn by turn :
(a) 35 cm (b) 30 cm (c) 20 cm (d) 10 cm
Which position of the object will produce :
(i) a magnified real image ?
(ii) a magnified virtual image ?
(iii) a diminished real image ?
(iv) an image of same size as the object ?
Solution :
(i) A magnified real image – When the object is placed at a distance of 20 cm from the mirror
i.e., between focus and centre of curvature.
(ii) A magnified virtual image – When the object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from the
mirror i.e., within its focus.
(iii) A diminished real image – When the object is placed at a distance of 35 cm from the
mirror i.e. beyond the centre of curvature.
(iv) An image of same size as the object – When the object is placed at a distance of 30 cm
from the mirror i.e., at the centre of curvature.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:192

Question 1:
According to the “New Cartesian Sign Convention” for mirrors, what sign has been given to the
focal length of :



(i) a concave mirror ?
(ii) a convex mirror ?
Solution :
(i) Negative
(ii) Positive

Question 2:
Which type of mirror has :
(a) positive focal length ?
(b) negative focal length ?
Solution :
(a) Convex mirror.
(b) Concave mirror.

Question 3:
What is the nature of a mirror having a focal length of, +10 cm ?
Solution :
Convex mirror (since focal length is positive).

Question 4:
What kind of mirror can have a focal length of, – 20 cm ?
Solution :
Concave mirror (since focal length is negative).

Question 5:
Complete the following sentence :
All the distances are measured from the……….. of a spherical mirror.
Solution :
Pole

Question 6:
What sign (+ve or -ve) has been given to the following on the basis of Cartesian Sign
Convention ?
(a) Height of a real image.
(b) Height of a virtual image.
Solution :
(a) Negative.
(b) Positive.

Question 7:
Describe the New Cartesian Sign Convention used in optics. Draw a labelled diagram to
illustrate this sign convention.
Solution :
According to the New Cartesian Sign Convention:
(i) All the distances are measured from pole of the mirror as origin.
(ii) Distances measured in the same direction as that of incident light are taken as positive.
(iii) Distances measured against the direction of incident light are taken as negative.
(iv) Distances measured upward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as positive.
(v) Distance measured downward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as negative.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:193



Question 8:
Giving reasons, state the ‘signs’ (positive or negative) which can be given to the following :
(a) object distance (u) for a concave mirror or convex mirror
(b) image distances (v) for a concave mirror
(c) image distances (v) for a convex mirror
Solution :
(a) Object distance (u) for a concave mirror or convex mirror is always negative because an
object is always placed to the left side of the mirror and the distances towards the left of the
mirror are always negative.
(b) In case of a concave mirror, if the image is formed on the left side of the mirror, then the
image distance (v) will be negative and if the image is formed on the right side of the mirror,
then the image distance (v) will be positive. This is because distances measured to the left of
the mirror are negative and to the right of the mirror is positive.
(c) Image distances (v) for a convex mirror is always positive because the image is always
formed behind the mirror.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:198

Question 1:
If the magnification of a body of size 1 m is 2, what is the size of the image ?
Solution :

Question 2:
What is the position of the image when an object is placed at a distance of 20 cm from a
concave mirror of focal length 20 cm ?
Solution :

Question 3:
What is the nature of image formed by a concave mirror if the magnification produced by the
mirror is (a) + 4, and (b) -2 ?
Solution :



Question 4:
State the relation between object distance, image distance and focal length of a spherical
mirror (concave mirror or convex mirror).
Solution :

Question 5:
Write the mirror formula. Give the meaning of each symbol which occurs in it.
Solution :

Question 6:
What is the ratio of the height of an image to the height of an object known as ?
Solution :

Question 7:
Define linear magnification produced by a mirror.
Solution :

Question 8:
Write down a formula for the magnification produced by a concave mirror.
(a) in terms of height of object and height of image
(b) in terms of object distance and image distance
Solution :



Question 9:
Describe the nature of image formed when the object is placed at a distance of 20 cm from a
concave mirror of focal length 10 cm.
Solution :

Question 10:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) If the magnification has a plus sign, then image is…………. and……….
(b) If the magnification has a minus sign, then the image is……….. and……….
Solution :

Question 11:
An object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a concave mirror of focal length 20 cm.
(a) Draw a ray diagram for the formation of image.
(b) Calculate the image distance.
(c) State two characteristics of the image formed.
Solution :



Question 12:
If an object of 10 cm height is placed at a distance of 36 cm from a concave mirror of focal
length 12 cm, find the position, nature and height of the image.
Solution :

Question 13:
At what distance from a concave mirror of focal length 10 cm should an object 2 cm long be
placed in order to get an erect image 6 cm tall ?
Solution :



Question 14:
When an object is placed at a distance of 15 cm from a concave mirror, its image is formed at
10 cm in front of the mirror. Calculate the focal length of the mirror.
Solution :

Question 15:
An object 3 cm high is placed at a distance of 8 cm from a concave mirror which produces a
virtual image 4.5 cm high :
(i) What is the focal length of the mirror ?
(ii) What is the position of image ?
(iii) Draw a ray-diagram to show the formation of image.
Solution :



Question 16:
A converging mirror forms a real image of height 4 cm of an object of height 1 cm placed 20
cm away from the mirror :
(i) Calculate the image distance.
(ii) What is the focal length of the mirror ?
Solution :

Question 17:
An object of size 7.0 cm is placed at 27 cm in front of a concave mirror of focal length 18 cm.
At what distance from the mirror should a screen be placed so that a sharp focussed image
can be obtained ? Find the size and nature of image.
[Hint. Find the value of image distance (v) first. The screen should be placed from the mirror at
a distance equal to image distance].
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:199

Question 18:
An object 3 cm high is placed at a distance of 10 cm in front of a converging mirror of focal
length 20 cm. Find the position, nature and size of the image formed.
Solution :

Question 19:
A concave mirror has a focal length of 4 cm and an object 2 cm tall is placed 9 cm away from
it. Find the nature, position and size of the image formed.
Solution :



Question 20:
When an object is placed 20 cm from a concave mirror, a real image magnified three times is
formed. Find :
(a) the focal length of the mirror.
(b) Where must the object be placed to give a virtual image three times the height of the object
?
Solution :

Question 21:
A dentist’s mirror has a radius of curvature of 3 cm. How far must it be placed from a small
dental cavity to give a virtual image of the cavity that is magnified five times ?
Solution :



Question 22:
A large concave mirror has a radius of curvature of 1.5 m. A person stands 10 m in front of the
mirror. Where is the person’s image ?
Solution :

Question 23:
An object of 5.0 cm size is placed at a distance of 20.0 cm from a converging mirror of focal
length 15.0 cm. At what distance from the mirror should a screen be placed to get the sharp
image ? Also calculate the size of the image.
Solution :

Question 24:
A concave mirror produces three times enlarged virtual image of an object placed at 10 cm in



front of it. Calculate the radius of curvature of the mirror.
Solution :

Question 25:
A bright object 50 mm high stands on the axis of a concave mirror of focal length 100 mm and
at a distance of 300 mm from the concave mirror. How big will the image be ?
Solution :

Question 26:
How far should an object be placed from the pole of a converging mirror of focal length 20 cm

to form a real image of the size exactly  th the size of the object ?
Solution :



Question 27:
When an object is placed at a distance of 50 cm from a concave spherical mirror, the
magnification produced

is,  Where should the object be placed to get a magnification of, ?
Solution :

Question 28:
An object is placed (a) 20 cm, (b) 4 cm, in front of a concave mirror of focal length 12 cm. Find
the nature and position of the image formed in each case.
Solution :



Question 29:
A concave mirror produces a real image 1 cm tall of an object 2.5 mm tall placed 5 cm from
the mirror. Find the position of the image and the focal length of the mirror.
Solution :

Question 30:
A man holds a spherical shaving mirror of radius of curvature 60 cm, and focal length 30 cm,
at a distance of 15 cm, from his nose. Find the position of image, and calculate the
magnification.
Solution :



Question 31:
(a) An object is placed just outside the principal focus of concave mirror. Draw a ray diagram
to show how the image is formed, and describe its size, position and nature.
(b) If the object is moved further away from the mirror, what changes are there in the position
and size of the image ?
(c) An object is 24 cm away from a concave mirror and its image is 16 cm from the mirror.
Find the focal length and radius of curvature of the mirror, and the magnification of the image.
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:200

Question 42:
Between which two points of concave mirror should an object be placed to obtain a
magnification of:
(a) -3 (b) +2.5 (c) – 0.4
Solution :
(a) Between focus and centre of curvature.
(b) Between pole and focus.
(c) Beyond the centre of curvature

Question 43:
At what distance from a concave mirror of focal length 10 cm should an object be placed so
that:
(a) its real image is formed 20 cm from the mirror ?
(b) its virtual image is formed 20 cm from the mirror ?
Solution :

Question 44:
If a concave mirror has a focal length of 10 cm, find the two positions where an object can be
placed to give, in each case, an image twice the height of the object.
Solution :



Question 45:
A mirror forms an image which is 30 cm from an object and twice its height.
(a) Where must the mirror be situated ?
(b) What is the radius of curvature ?
(c) Is the mirror convex or concave ?
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:205

Question 1:
What type of image/images are formed by :
(a) a convex mirror ?
(b) a concave mirror ?
Solution :
(a) Virtual and erect
(b) Virtual and erect; real and inverted



Question 2:
Which mirror has a wider field of view ?
Solution :
Convex mirror has a wider field of view.

Question 3:
If you want to see an enlarged image of your face, state whether you will use a concave mirror
or a convex mirror ?
Solution :
Concave mirror.

Question 4:
Which mirror always produces a virtual, erect and diminished image of an object ?
Solution :
Convex mirror always produces a virtual, erect and diminished image.

Question 5:
An object is placed at a long distance in front of a convex mirror of radius of curvature 30 cm.
State the position of its image.
Solution :
Image is formed at the focus.
focus = 30/2 = 15 cm
i.e. 15 cm behind the convex mirror.

Question 6:
Name the spherical mirror which can produce a real and diminished image of an object.
Solution :
Concave mirror.

Question 7:
Name the spherical mirror which can produce a virtual and diminished image of an object.
Solution :
Convex mirror.

Question 8:
One wants to see a magnified image of an object in a mirror. What type of mirror should one
use ?
Solution :
Concave mirror should be used to get a magnified image.

Question 9:
Name the mirror which can give :
(a) an erect and enlarged image of an object.
(b) an erect and diminished image of an object.
Solution :
(a) Concave mirror.
(b) Convex mirror.

Question 10:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
A diverging mirror is used as a rear-view mirror.
Solution :
True.



Question 11:
What type of mirror could be used :
(a) as a shaving mirror ?
(b) as a shop security mirror ?
Solution :
(a) Concave mirror.
(b) Convex mirror.

Question 12:
Which type of mirror is usually used as a rear-view mirror in motor cars ?
Solution :
Convex mirror.

Question 13:
What kind of mirrors are used in big shopping centres to watch the activities of the customers
?
Solution :
Convex mirrors.

Question 14:
A ray of light going towards the focus of a convex mirror becomes parallel to the principal axis
after reflection from the mirror. Draw a labelled diagram to represent this situation.
Solution :
diagram 47.

Question 15:
Fill in the following blank with a suitable word :
A ray of light which is parallel to the principal axis of a convex mirror, appears to be coming
from…….. after
reflection from the mirror.
Solution :
focus.

Question 16:
Why does a driver prefer to use a convex mirror as a rear-view mirror in a vehicle ?
Solution :
A driver prefers to use a convex mirror as a rear-view mirror because
(i) A convex mirror always produces an erect image of the objects.
(ii) A convex mirror has wider field of view.

Question 17:
Why can you not use a concave mirror as a rear-view mirror in vehicles ?
Solution :
We cannot use a concave mirror as a rear-view mirror in vehicles because a concave mirror
produces inverted images of distant objects. So, all the vehicles will be seen running upside
down in the mirror.

Question 18:
Where would the image be formed by a convex mirror if the object is placed :
(a) between infinity and pole of the mirror ?
(b) at infinity ?
Draw labelled ray-diagrams to show the formation of image in both the cases.
Solution :



(a) Image will form between pole and focus.
(b) At focus.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:206

Question 19:
The shiny outer surface of a hollow sphere of aluminium of radius 50 cm is to be used as a
mirror :
(a) What will be the focal length of this mirror ?
(b) Which type of spherical mirror will it provide ?
(c) State whether this spherical mirror will diverge or converge light rays.
Solution :
(a) R=50cm
f=?
We know that
f=R/2 = 50/2 = 25 cm
(b) Convex mirror
(c) It will diverge light rays.

Question 20:
What is the advantage of using a convex mirror as a rear-view mirror in vehicles as compared
to a plane mirror ? Illustrate your answer with the help of labelled diagrams.
Solution :

Question 21:
Give two uses of a convex mirror. Explain why you would choose convex mirror for these uses.
Solution :
Two uses of convex mirror:
(i) A convex mirror is used as a rear-view mirror in vehicles because it forms erect and
dimished images of the objects and has a wider field of view.
(ii) Big convex mirrors are used as security mirror in shops so that a large number of goods
displayed in the shop can be seen in the convex mirror.

Question 22:
What would your image look like if you stood dose to a large :
(a) convex mirror ?
(b) concave mirror ?
Give reasons for your answer.
Solution :
(a) Our image will be diminished, virtual and erect. This is because when the object lies
anywhere between the pole and inifinity, the concave mirror forms a diminished, virtual and
erect image.
(b) Our image will be enlarged, virtual and erect. This is because when the object lies within the
focus of a concave mirror, it forms an enlarged, virtual and erect image.

Question 23:



Which of the following are concave mirrors and which convex mirrors ?
Shaving mirrors, Car headlight mirror, Searchlight mirror, Driving mirror, Dentist’s inspection
mirror, Torch mirror, Staircase mirror in a double-decker bus, Make-up mirror, Solar furnace
mirror, Satellite TV dish, Shop security mirror.
Solution :
Shaving mirror – concave mirror.
Car headlight mirror – concave mirror.
Searchlight mirror – concave mirror.
Driving mirror – convex mirror.
Dentist’s inspection mirror – concave mirror.
Torch mirror – concave mirror.
Staircase mirror in a double-decker bus – convex mirror.
Make-up mirror – concave mirror.
Solar furnace mirror – concave mirror.
Satellite TV dish – concave mirror.
Shop security mirror – convex mirror.

Question 24:
How will you distinguish between a plane mirror, a concave mirror and a convex mirror without
touching them ?
Solution :
We can distinguish between a plane mirror, a concave mirror and a convex mirror by bringing
our face close to each mirror, turn by turn. If the image is of the same size as our face, it is a
plane mirror. If the image is magnified, it is a concave mirror. If the image is diminished, it is a
convex mirror.

Question 25:
If a driver has one convex and one plane rear-view mirror, how would the images in each
mirror appear different ?
Solution :
The images formed in the convex rear-view mirror will be smaller than those formed in the
plane rear-view mirror.

Question 26:
(a) Draw a labelled ray diagram to show the formation of image of an object by a convex
mirror. Mark
clearly the pole, focus and centre of curvature on the diagram.
(b) What happens to the image when the object is moved away from the mirror gradually ?
(c) State three characteristics of the image formed by a convex mirror.
Solution :
(a) Virtual and erect.
(b) Virtual and erect; real and inverted.

Question 27:
(a) Draw a labelled ray diagram to show the formation of image in a convex mirror when the
object is at
infinity. Mark clearly the pole and focus of the mirror in the diagram.
(b) State three characteristics of the image formed in this case.
(c) Draw diagram to show how a convex mirror can be used to give a large field of view.
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:207



Question 37:
The diagrams show the appearance of a fork when placed in front of and close to two mirrors
A and B, turn by turn.
(a) Which mirror is convex?
(b) Which mirror is concave?
Give reasons for your choice.

Solution :
(a) Mirror B is convex since it forms a smaller image of fork.
(b) Mirror A is concave since it forms a larger image of fork.

Question 38:
The diagram shows a dish antenna which is used to receive television signals from a satellite.
The antenna (signal detector) is fixed in front of the curved dish.
(a) What is the purpose of the dish?
(b) Should it be concave or convex?
(c) Where should the antenna be positioned to receive the strongest possible signals?
(d) Explain what change you would expect in the signals if a larger dish was used.

Solution :
(a) The purpose of the dish is to collect a large amount of TV signals from the satellite.
(b) Concave.
(c) At the focus of the dish.
(d) Stronger signals will be received.

Question 39:
A man standing in front of a special mirror finds his image having a very small head, a fat body
and legs of normal size. What is the shape of :
(a) top part of the mirror ?
(b) middle part of the mirror ?
(c) bottom part of the mirror ?
Give reasons for your choice.
Solution :
(a) Convex – Because a convex mirror forms a diminished image when the object is placed
near it.
(b) Concave – Because a concave mirror forms an enlarged image when the object is placed
near it.



(c) Plane – Because a plane mirror forms an image of same size as the object.

Question 40:
Two big mirrors A and B are fitted side by side on a wall. A man is standing at such a distance
from the wall that he can see the erect image of his face in both the mirrors. When the man
starts walking towards the mirrors, he finds that the size of his face in mirror A goes on
increasing but that in mirror B remains the same
(a) mirror A is concave and mirror B is convex
(b) mirror A is plane and mirror B is concave
(c) mirror A is concave and mirror B is convex
(d) mirror A is convex and mirror B is plane
Solution :
(c) Mirror A is concave and mirror B is concave

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:209

Question 1:
An object is kept at a distance of 5 cm in front of a convex mirror of focal length 10 cm.
Calculate the position and magnification of the image and state its nature.
Solution :

Question 2:
An object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a convex mirror of focal length 5 cm.
Draw a ray-diagram showing the formation of image.
State two characteristics of the image formed.
Calculate the distance of the image from mirror.
Solution :



Question 3:
An object is placed at a distance of 6 cm from a convex mirror of focal length 12 cm. Find the
position and nature of the image.
Solution :

Question 4:
An object placed 20 cm in front of a mirror is found to have an image 15 cm (a) in front of it,
(b) behind the mirror. Find the focal length of the mirror and the kind of mirror in each case.
Solution :



Question 5:
An arrow 2.5 cm high is placed at a distance of 25 cm from a diverging mirror of focal length
20 cm. Find the nature, position and size of the image formed.
Solution :

Question 6:
A convex mirror used as a rear-view mirror in a car has a radius of curvature of 3 m. If a bus is
located at a distance of 5 m from this mirror, find the position of image. What is the nature of
the image ?
Solution :



Question 7:
A diverging mirror of radius of curvature 40 cm forms an image which is half the height of the
object. Find the object and image positions.
Solution :

Question 8:
The radius of curvature of a convex mirror used as a rear view mirror in a moving car is 2.0 m.
A truck is coming from behind it at a distance of 3.5 m. Calculate (a) position, and (b) size, of
the image relative to the size of the truck. What will be the nature of the image ?
Solution :

Question 9:
(a) Draw a diagram to represent a convex mirror. On this diagram mark principal axis, principal
focus F



and the centre of curvature C if the focal length of convex mirror is 3 cm.
(b) An object 1 cm tall is placed 30 cm in front of a convex mirror of focal length 20 cm. Find
the size and position of the image formed by the convex mirror.
Solution :

Question 10:
A shop security mirror 5.0 m from certain items displayed in the shop produces one-tenth
magnification.
(a) What is the type of mirror ?
(b) What is the radius of curvature of the mirror ?
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:210

Question 11:
An object is placed 15 cm from (a) a converging mirror, and (b) a diverging mirror, of radius of
curvature 20 cm. Calculate the image position and magnification in each case.



Solution :

Question 12:
An object 20 cm from a spherical mirror gives rise to a virtual image 15 cm behind the mirror.
Determine the magnification of the image and the type of mirror used.
Solution :



 Our Environment

Question 1:
What is the functional unit of the environment comprising of the living and non-living
components called ?
Solution :
Ecosystem.

Question 2:
Name two natural ecosystems and two artificial ecosystems.
Solution :
Natural ecosystems – Grass land and forest. Artificial ecosystems – Parks and Gardens.

Question 3:
Which one of the following is not a terrestial ecosystem ?
Forest, Grassland, Aquarium, Desert
Solution :
Aquarium.

Question 4:
Why are plants called producers ?
Solution :
Plants are called producers because green plants prepare their own food from simple
inorganic substances like carbon dioxide and water by using sunlight energy in the presence of
chlorophyll.

Question 5:
What name has been given to those organisms which break down the complex organic
compounds present in dead animals and plants ?
Solution :
Decomposers.

Question 6:
What are planktons ?
Solution :
Planktons are very minute or microscopic organisms freely floating on the surface of water in
a pond, lake, river or ocean.



Question 7:
State whether the following statements are true or false :State whether the following
statements are true or false :
(a) In biology, human beings are called producers.
(b) Secondary consumers and tertiary consumers, both are carnivores.
Solution :
(a) False.
(b) True.

Question 8:
Which category of organisms forms the starting point of a food chain ?
Solution :
Producer.

Question 9:
Which of the following belong to the same trophic level ?
Goat; Spider ; Plants ; Hawk ; Rat .
Solution :
Goat and Rat (Both are herbivores).

Question 10:
Which of the following belong to the same trophic level ?
Tree ; Frog ; Snake ; Grass ; Lizard
Solution :
Tree and Grass (Both are producers).

Question 11:
Write an aquatic food chain.
Solution :

Question 12:
Name the organisms belonging to the second and the fourth trophic levels in the food chain
comprising the following :
Frogs, Plants, Snakes, Hawk, Insects
Solution :
Second trophic level: Insects Fourth trophic level: Snakes

Question 13:
What are the various steps of food chain called ?
Solution :
Trophic levels



Question 14:
Construct a food chain comprising the following :
Snakes, Hawk, Rats, Plants
Solution :

Question 15:
Arrange the following in a food chain :
Fish, Algae, Small animals, Big Fish
Solution :

Question 16:
Which organisms belong to third and fourth trophic levels in the food chain comprising the
following ?
Rats, Plants, Hawk, Snakes
Solution :
Third Trophic level: Snakes.Fourth trophic level: Hawk.

Question 17:
Which one term in the following includes the others ?
air, flora, fauna, environment, water, sunlight, soil
Solution :
Environment.

Question 18:
A food chain represents a unidirectional flow of X. What is X ?
Solution :
Energy.

Question 19:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words : Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Decomposer organisms are……………. in their action.
(b) In nature, all green plants are……………. whereas animals are consumers.
(c) A series of organisms, each of which feeds on the next organism, the beginning of which is
a green plant, is called a…………….
(d) The science that deals with the inter-relationships of living things with one another and
their environment is called …………….
(e) Plastic is a……………. material whereas paper is a……………. material.
Solution :
(a) Specific.
(b) Producers.
(c) Food Chain.
(d) Ecology.
(e) Non – biodegradable; Biodegradable.

Question 20:



Explain the terms ‘producer’ and ‘consumer’. Give two examples of producers and two of
consumers.
Solution :

1. Producers are the organisms which can be prepare their own food from simple inorganic
substances like carbon dioxide and water by using sunlight energy in the presence of
chlorophyll. Example – Green plants and certain blue-green algae

2. Those organisms which consume food (eat food) prepared by producers are called
consumers. Example – Lion and Tiger.

Question 21:
(a) Define decomposers. Name one decomposer.
(b) What is the role of decomposers in the ecosystem ?
Solution :
(a) The micro-organisms which break down the complex organic compounds present in dead
organisms like dead plants and animals and their products like faeces, urine, etc., into simpler
substances are called decomposers. Example – Bacteria and Fungi.
(b) The decomposers help in decomposing the dead bodies of plants and animals, and hence
act as cleansing agents of environment.

Question 22:
What is meant by a primary consumer, secondary consumer and a tertiary consumer ? Give
one example of each.
Solution :

1. The animals which eat only plants are called Herbivores. All herbivores are primary
consumers. Example – Goat

2. The small carnivores which feed on herbivores (primary consumers) are called
secondary consumers. Example – Frog

3. The Large carnivores (or top carnivores) which feed upon the small carnivores
(secondary consumers) are called tertiary consumers. Example – Lion

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:227

Question 23:
Give an example of a four step food chain operating in grassland. Name the secondary
consumer in this food chain
Solution :

Question 24:
(a) Define trophic level. Draw the food chain with four trophic levels.
(b) What will happen if we kill all the organisms in one trophic level ?
Solution :
(a) Trophic Levels – The various steps in a food chain at which the transfer of food takes place
are called trophic levels. In a food chain, each step representing an organism forms a trophic
level.



(b) If we kill all the organisms in one trophic level, then the transfer of food (and energy) to the
next trophic level will stop due to which the organisms of next trophic level will starve and die
or migrate to other areas. The killing of all the organisms in one trophic level will also lead to
the overpopulation of organisms in the previous trophic level. These effects will cause an
imbalance in the ecosystem. For example, if we kill all the herbivorous animals like deer,
rabbits, etc., in a forest, then the carnivorous animals like lions, tiger, etc., will not get food. Due
to this, the lions and tigers etc., will starve and die or migrate from forest and go towards
human settlements and attack people. Moreover, in the absence of herbivores like deer,
rabbits, etc., the population of the previous trophic level ‘plants’ (or vegetation) will increase too
much (because there are no deer or rabbits to eat them). All these effects will create an
imbalance in the ecosystem.

Question 25:
What is the difference between the food habits of organisms belonging to the first and the
third trophic levels ? Give one example each of the organisms belonging to these two trophic
levels.
Solution :
The organisms belonging to the first trophic level are producers which make their own food
with the help of sun’s energy. For example – Green plants. The organisms of third trophic level
are carnivores that feed upon herbivores. For example – Lion and Tiger.

Question 26:
Can the organisms of any trophic level be removed without causing any damage to the
ecosystem ? Will the impact of removing all the organisms in a trophic level be different for
different trophic levels ?
Solution :
No. The impact of removing all the organisms of a trophic level will be different for different
trophic levels.

Question 27:
Consider the food chain :
Grass → Deer → Lion
What will happen if all the lions are removed from the above food chain ?
Solution :
If all the lions are removed, then there will be no predator control over the population of deer
due to which its populations will greatly increase and deer will eat all grass. Over grazing will
eliminate the grass and other green plants completely and turn the lush green forest into a
desert area having no vegetation at all.

Question 28:
The number of malaria patients in a village increased tremendously when large number of
frogs were exported from the village. What could be the cause for it ?
Solution :
Frogs eat up mosquitoes. In the absence of frogs, the number of mosquitoes increase too
much and spread malaria.

Question 29:
How does a biodegradable waste differ from a non-biodegradable waste ? Give two examples
of non- biodegradable wastes which pollute our environment.



Solution :
Bioderghradable Wastes

1. Those waste materials which can be broken down to non-poisonous substances in
nature by the action of microorganisms (like bacteria) are called biodegradable wastes.

2. They get recycled and therefore do not require dumping sites.
3. They do not cause any pollution to the soil.

Example:- Paper, Wood, etc.

Non-Biodegradable Wastes

1. Those waste materials which cannot be broken down to non-poisonous substances in
nature are called non-biodergradable wastes.

2. They cannot be recycled easily and therefore are to be dumped which requires lot of
space. This cause wastage of land.

3. The harmful chemical leach out of these wastes when they are dumped in soil. This
leads to soil pollution.
Example:- DDT, Plastic and Polythene bags

Question 30:
Which of the following are biodegradable and which non-biodegradable ?
Glass bottle, Paper, Ball point pen refill, Hay, DDT, Wheat, Cake, Wood,
Polythene bag, Jute bag, Cotton cloth, Grass, Vegetable peels
Solution :
Glass bottle – Non-biodegradable Paper – Biodegradable Ball point pen refill – Non-
biodegradable Hay – biodegradable DDT – Non- biodegradable Wheat – Biodegradable Cake –
Biodegradable Wood – Biodegradable Polythene Bag – Non-biodegradable Jute Bag –
Biodegradable Cotton Cloth – Biodegradable Grass – Biodegradable Vegetable peels –
Biodegradable

Question 31:
(a) Describe an activity to show that while paper is biodegradable but plastic (say, polythene)
is non-
biodegradable.
(b) Explain why, some materials are biodegradable but some are non-biodegradable.
Solution :
(a) We take a piece of paper and a plastic bag (Polythene Bag). Now dig the ground to about
15 centimeters depth and place the piece of paper and plastic bag in the dug up ground
separately. After a month, we dig up the buried material and observe them. We will find that
the piece of paper has been partially eaten up but the plastic bag has been remained
unaffected. This means that the paper have been decomposed by the micro-organisms
present in the soil. So paper is biodegradable. On the other hand, the plastic bag has not been
decomposed by the micro ?organisms present in the soil, therefore It is non-biodegradable.
(b) It is due to the property of decomposer organisms of being specific in their action that
some waste materials are biodegradable and other are non- biodegradable.

Question 32:
Write down a food chain :Write down a food chain :
(a) in the sea
(b) which ends with humans
(c) with five links in it.
Solution :



Question 33:
At which trophic level a person is feeding when he is eating :At which trophic level a person is
feeding when he is eating :
(a) roasted chicken
(b) bread
(c) eggs
(d) apple
(e) fish
Solution :
(a) Third trophic level
(b) Second trophic level
(c) Third trophic level
(d) Second trophic level
(e) Fourth trophic level

Question 34:
A student went to study a local pond. In one part of the pond she noticed tadpoles scraping at
some pond weed. In another part she saw a water beetle holding a tadpole in its jaws.A
student went to study a local pond. In one part of the pond she noticed tadpoles scraping at
some pond weed. In another part she saw a water beetle holding a tadpole in its jaws.
(a) Construct a food chain for the pond.
(b) How many links are there in this chain ?
Solution :
(a) Weed Tadpole Water beetle
(b) Three

Question 35:
Construct (a) a long food chain, and (b) a short foodchain, ending with man.
Solution :

Question 36:
(a) State one advantage of using jute bags over plastic bags for shopping.
(b) Write a common food chain of a pond ecosystem having four links.
Solution :



(a) Jute bags should be used for shopping because these are biodegradable whereas plastic
bags are non- biodegradable.

Question 37:
We do not clean ponds or lakes but an aquarium needs to be cleaned periodically. Why ?
Solution :
Pond is a complete eco system having decomposer organisms which are the cleansing agents
themselves. Aquarium is an incomplete ecosystem and does not have decomposer organisms
for cleansing purposes.

Question 38:
What will be the consequence of the absence of decomposers in the ecosystem ?
Solution :
In the absence of decomposers, the dead bodies of plants and animals would keep lying as
such and the elements of plant and animal bodies would never be returned to their original
pool like soil, air and water. The cycling process of life and death would be disrupted. The
nutrient pool will not be replenished and would exhaust soon.

Question 39:
Give two differences between food chain and food web.
Solution :

Question 40:
Write one or two words for each of the following statements/definitions :Write one or two
words for each of the following statements/definitions :
(a) Each level of food chain where transfer of energy takes place
(b) The physical factors like temperature, rainfall, light, soil, air and water of an ecosystem
(c) Organisms which depend on the producers for food either directly or indirectly
(d) The physical and biological world where we live in
(e) Selfcontained unit of living things and their non-living environment needing only sunlight for
its functioning
Solution :
(a) Trophic Level
(b) Abiotic components
(c) Consumers
(d) Environment
(e) Ecosystem

Question 41:
(a) What is meant by biodegradable waste materials ? Give two examples of biodegradable
wastes.



(b) Which of the following materials are non-biodegradable ?
Aluminium wire, Tea leaves, Synthetic fibre, Wool
Solution :
(a) The waste materials which can be broken down to non- poisonous substances in nature in
due course of time by the action of micro-organisms like certain bacteria are called
biodegradable waste materials. Example ? Paper and wool.
(b) Aluminum wire and Synthetic fibre.

Question 42:
(a) What is meant by non-biodegradable waste materials ? Give two examples of non-
biodegradable wastes.
(b) Which of the following materials are biodegradable ?Animal bones, Iron nails, Plastic mugs,
Leather belts, Silver foil
Solution :
(a) The waste materials which cannot be broken down into non-poisonous or harmless
substances in nature are called non-biodegradable waste materials. Example – D.D.T and
Plastics. (b) Animal Bones and Leather Belts.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:228

Question 43:
(a) Define an ecosystem. Give examples of any two ecosystems.
(b) List the biotic and abiotic components of an ecosystem.
Solution :
(a) An eco system is a self contained unit of living things(plants, animals and decomposers),
and their non living environment (soil, air and water). Example – a grassland and a forest.
(b)

1.  Biotic component – The biotic components of the ecosystem is a community of
organisms which is made up of many different inter-dependent populations. It includes –
producers, consumers and decomposers.

2. Abiotic components – The abiotic components of the ecosystem (non living
components) include the physical environment like soil, water and air alongwith the in
organic substances like carbon dioxide, nitrogen, water and phosphorous.

Question 44:
(a) What is a food chain ? Give one example of a simple food chain.
(b) What is a ‘food web’ ? Show its formation.
Solution :
(a) The sequence of living organisms in a community in which one organism consumes other
organisms to transfer food energy is called a food chain. The simple food chain operating in
grass land is:

(b) The interconnected food chains operating in an ecosystem which establish a network of
relationships between various species is called a food web.



In this food web, we can see a network of numerous pathways along which the food flows
within grass land community. This food web starts from the plants which is producer and end
in top carnivore hawk.

Question 45:
(a) What is meant by ‘environment’ ?
(b) What type of substances are the major pollutants of the environment ? Name two such
substances.
(c) Name the organisms whose uncontrolled activities are damaging the environment.
(d) Explain why, it is better to use paper bags than plastic bags.
Solution :
(a)The physical and biological world together is called environment.
(b) The non- biodegradable wastes pollutes the environment like plastic and polythene bags.
(c) Human beings are the only organisms which change the natural environment to fulfill their
needs. The uncontrolled activities of human beings are damaging the balanced and healthy
environment.
(d) Paper bags should be used for shopping because these are biodegradable whereas plastic
bags are non- biodegradable.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:240

Question 1:
What percentage of the solar energy is trapped and utilised by the plants ?
Solution :
1%.

Question 2:
What percentage of energy available at the producer level is transferred at successive trophic
levels in a food chain ?
Solution :
10%.

Question 3:
Name the process in which a harmful chemical enters the food chain and gets concentrated at
each trophic level.
Solution :
Biological Magnification.



Question 4:
In a food chain consisting of grass, frog, bird and insects, where will the concentration of the
harmful chemicals be maximum ?
Solution :
Bird.

Question 5:
If a harmful chemical enters a food chain comprising cat, mice and plants, which one of these
organisms is likely to have the maximum concentration of the harmful chemical in its body ?
Solution:
Cat.

Question 6:
Which radiations are absorbed by ozone layer ?
Solution :
Ultra Violet radiations.

Question 7:
Name the group of chemical compounds which damages the ozone layer.
Solution :
Chlorofluro Carbons.

Question 8:
Name two waste materials which can be recycled.
Solution :
Paper and Plastics.

Question 9:
Name the process by which the volume of solid wastes can be reduced.
Solution :
Incineration.

Question 10:
If 5 joules of energy is available at producer level (plants), then how much energy will be
transferred to the lion in the following food chain ? If 5 joules of energy is available at producer
level (plants), then how much energy will be transferred to the lion in the following food chain ?
Plants —> Goat —> Lion
Solution :
0.05 J.

Question 11:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Only 10 per cent of the light energy given by the sun is available for transfer at each higher
trophic level in a food chain.
Solution :
False.

Question 12:
Where does all the energy in living organisms originate from ?
Solution :
Sun.



Question 13:
Why are there rarely more than five links (or five organisms) in a food chain ?
Solution: 
Because after that the energy available for the next organism will be so small that it will be
insufficient to sustain the life of that organism.

Question 14:
Name two predators of snakes in a food web operating in a forest ecosystem.
Solution :
Peacock and hawk.

Question 15:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Ultraviolet rays can cause skin…………………
(b) Pesticides enter the food chain at the…………………. level
(c) Grass →…………….→Human
(d) Lettuce →…………….→ Fox
(e) Plants→ Antelope→ …………….
Solution :
(a) Cancer.
(b) Producer.
(c) Goat.
(d) Rabbit.
(e) Lion.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:241

Question 16:
What is ten per cent law ? Explain with an example.
Solution :
Ten PerCent Law – According to ten per cent law, only 10 per cent of the energy entering a
particular trophic level of organisms is available for transfer to the next higher trophic
level.Example – Suppose 1000 Joules of light energy emitted by the sun falls on the plants.
Consider a food chain:

The plants or first trophic level has 10 joules of energy in it. Now according to 10 percent law,
only 10% of 10 joules of energy (which is 1 joule) will be available for transfer to the next
trophic level, so that the herbivore will have only 1 joule of energy stored as food at the second
trophic level. 10% of the remaining 1 joule will be transferred to third trophic level of carnivore.
So, the energy available in the lion as food will be only 0.1 joule.

Question 17:
Write the full form of CFC. Give its one harmful effect.
Solution :
CFC – Chlorofluorocarbons. Chlorofluorocarbons released into the air react with ozone gas
present in the ozone layer and destroy it gradually.

Question 18:
Explain how, harmful ultraviolet radiations of sunlight are prevented from reaching the earth’s
surface.
Solution :



Ozone layer absorbs most of the harmful ultra violet radiations coming from the sun and
prevents them from reaching the earth.

Question 19:
What are the causes of depletion of ozone layer ? Which diseases are likely to be caused if the
ozone layer will become thinner ?
Solution :
The depletion of ozone layer is due to the use of chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons. Skin
cancer is caused if the ozone layer will become thinner.

Question 20:
Explain how harmful chemicals enter our bodies.
Solution :
Pesticides are poisonous chemical substances which are sprayed over crop plants to protect
them from pests (harmful small animals) and diseases. These chemical pesticides mix up
with soil and water. From soil and water, these pesticides are absorbed by the growing plants
alongwith water and other minerals. When herbivorous animals eat plant food, then these
poisonous chemical pesticides go into their bodies through the food chain. And when the
carnivore animals eat herbivores, then the pesticides get transferred to their bodies. Man being
an omnivore; eat plant food as well as herbivores. So the pesticides present in plant food and
herbivores also get transferred to the man’s body through food. Thus, pesticides enter the
food chain at the producer level (plant level) and in the process of transfer of food through
food chains these harmful chemicals get concentrated at each trophic level.

Question 21:
‘If we excessively use pesticides to protect the crops from diseases, then it may cause long-
term damage to mankind’. Justify this statement.
Solution :
Pesticides are non – biodegradable chemicals, so they get accumulated at each trophic level.
Since humans occupy the top level in any food chain, so the maximum amount of harmful
chemical pesticides gets accumulated in our bodies. This damages our health gradually.

Question 22:
What is meant by biological magnification ? With the help of a food chain, explain how
biological magnification of harmful chemicals can occur.
Solution :
The increase in concentration of harmful chemical substances like pesticides in the body of
living organisms at each trophic level of a food chain is called biological magnification. The
organism which occurs at the highest trophic level (on the extreme right side) in the food chain
will have the maximum concentration of harmful concentration of harmful chemicals in its
body. In this case grass is eaten by grasshopper; grasshopper is eaten by frog; frog is eaten by
snake and finally snake is eaten by peacock. So, the food chain will be:

Since the peacock occurs at the highest trophic level (on the extreme right side) in this food
chain, it will have the maximum concentration of harmful chemicals in its body.

Question 23:
What is meant by bioconcentration of pesticides ? Which common pesticide has accumulated
in human body in considerable amounts ?



Solution :
The accumulation of harmful chemicals such as pesticides in the living organisms like plants,
animals and humans (men) through the food chain is called bio-concentration of pesticides.
DDT has accumulated in human body through food chains.

Question 24:
What is garbage ? What does garbage consist of ?
Solution :
The household wastes are called garbage. It includes left -over food, fruit and vegetable peels,
waste paper, unwanted plastic objects etc.

Question 25:
Name the various modes of waste disposal.
Solution :
The various modes of waste disposal are:

1. Recycling
2. Preparation of compost
3. Incineration
4. Landfill
5. Sewage treatment

Question 26:
How can the wastes such as paper, plastic and metal objects be disposed of ?
Solution :
The solid wastes like papers, plastics and metals are recycled. For example – waste paper is
send to paper mills where it is reprocessed to form new paper once again.

Question 27:
Give a method for the disposal of household wastes such as left-over food, fruit and vegetable
peels, and
leaves of potted plants.
Solution :
Preparation of compost is a method in which the disposal of household wastes such as left-
over food, fruit and vegetable peels and leaves of potted plants can be converted into compost
by burying in a pit dug into the ground and is used as manure.

Question 28:
What is meant by incineration ? For what purpose is it used ?
Solution :
Incineration means reducing to ashes. It is used to destroy the household waste, chemical
waste and biological waste.

Question 29:
How are most of the solid wastes in urban areas disposed of ?
Solution :
Most of the solid waste in urban areas is dumped in low line areas of ground and covered with
earth to level the uneven ground. This method is called landfill.

Question 30:
State two advantages of using disposable paper cups over disposable plastic cups.
Solution :



The advantages of using disposable paper cups over disposable plastic cups are:

1. Paper cups are biodegradable. So, even if paper cups are thrown away after use, they
will decompose (break down) automatically by the action of micro-organisms in due
course of time. On the other hand, plastic cups are non-biodegradable. They will remain
as such and pollute the environment.

2. Paper cups can be disposed off by burning without causing much air pollution. On the
other hand, burning of plastic cups produces toxic gases (poisonous gases) which
causes too much air pollution.

Question 31:
What is sewage ? How is sewage disposed of ?
Solution :
The dirty drain water containing urine and faeces which is carried from our homes by the
underground pipes (called sewers) is called sewage. Sewage is disposed off by treating it at
the sewage treatment plant (or sewage works). The treatment of sewage produces clean
water which is discharged into the river. The organic matter present in sewage is ‘digested’ in
the digesters of sewage treatment plant to produce ‘sewage gas’ (which is kind of biogas) and
manure.

Question 32:
Write the harmful effects of ozone depletion.
Solution :
Harmful effects of ozone depletion are:

1. It can cause skin cancer.
2. It damages the eyes by causing the eye disease called cataract.
3. It damages the immune system by lowering the body’s resistance to diseases.

Question 33
What would happen if the ozone layer in the atmosphere completely disappears ?
Solution :
If the ozone layer in the atmosphere disappears completely, then all the extremely harmful
ultraviolet radiations coming from the sun would reach the earth. These ultraviolet radiations
would cause skin cancer and other ailments in men and animals, and also damage the plants.

Question 34:
(a) With the help of a flow diagram, describe how energy from the sun flows through various
trophic levels.
(b) Explain why, the flow of energy in the ecosystem is said to be unidirectional.
Solution :
(a) The energy from sun flows through various trophic levels. The food and energy are
transferred from producer organisms to herbivores and from herbivores to carnivores, through
the food chain. First Step – The green plants trap solar energy with the help of green pigment
called chlorophyll which converts the sunlight energy into chemical energy. This gets stored as
carbohydrates in the plants. About 1% of the sun’s energy falling on the leaves is used by the
plants in the process of photosynthesis and stored as chemical energy of food. The plants
utilize the stored energy for their metabolic activities like respiration and growth. Some of the
energy is not utilised and it is released as unusable heat into the environment. Second Step –
The plants are eaten up by herbivores and the chemical energy of plants is transferred to
them. The herbivores utilize this energy for various metabolic activities and release unused
energy as heat energy to the environment.



Third Step – The herbivores are eaten up by carnivores. The chemical energy stored in the
flesh of herbivores is transferred to the carnivores and they utilise this energy for their
metabolic activities like respiration and growth and some of the energy which remains
unutilised, is released into the environment. This process of transfer of energy is repeated with
large carnivores and so on.

(b) The flow of energy in the ecosystem is said to be unidirectional because the energy lost as
heat from the living organisms of a food chain cannot be reused by plants in photosynthesis.

Question 35:
(a) What is ozone ? How is it formed ?
(b) How does ozone layer protect us from harmful effects in the environment ?
(c) What is UNEP ? What step has been taken by UNEP in 1987 to prevent too much damage
to the ozone layer ?
Solution :
(a) Ozone is a poisonous gas. It is made up of three atoms of oxygen combined together. It is
formed high up in the atmosphere by the action of ultraviolet radiation on oxygen gas. The
high energy ultraviolet radiation (UV radiation) coming from the sun splits oxygen gas into free
oxygen atoms.

The free oxygen atoms thus produced are very reactive. One oxygen atom reacts with an
oxygen molecule to form an ozone molecule:

(b) Ozone layer protect us from harmful effects as it absorbs most of the ultraviolet radiations
coming from the sun and prevents them from reaching the earth.
(c) UNEP – United Nation Environment Program. In 1987, in an attempt to protect ozone layer,
the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) forged an agreement among its member
countries to freeze CFC production at 1986 levels.

Question 36:
(a) How is energy introduced into the ecosystem ?
(b) Consider the following food chains :

1.  Plants —-> Mice —-> Snakes —-> Hawks
2.  Plants —-> Mice —-> Hawks

If energy available at the producer level in both the food chains is 100 J, in which case
will hawks get more energy as food and by how much ? Justify your answer.

Solution :



(a) The energy enters the living components of the ecosystem through the process of
photosynthesis.
(b) (i) The producer level in the food chain are plants, so 100 J of energy is available in plants
as food. Applying the 10% law to the above food chain:

1.  According to the 10% law, 10% of energy of plants will be available as food in mice.
Thus, the energy available to mice will be 10% of 100 J, which is 10 J.

2. The energy available to snakes will be 10% of 10 J, which is 1 J.
3. The energy available to hawks will be 10% of 1 J, which is 0.1 J.

(ii) The producer level in the food chain is plants, so 100 J of energy is available in plants as
food. Applying the 10% law to the above food chain:

1. According to the 10% law, 10% of energy of plants will be available as food in mice. Thus,
the energy available to mice will be 10% of 100 J, which is 10 J.

2. The energy available to hawks will be 10% of 10 J, which is 1 J.

Hawks will get more energy in food chain

1. because in this food chain there are three trophic levels so the energy available will be
more as compared to food chain

2. which has four trophic levels.

Question 37:
(a) Explain why, a food chain usually cannot have more than three or four steps.
(b) Calculate the amount of energy that will be available to big fish in the following food chain,
if 10,000 J of energy is available to small algae from the sun :
Small algae —-> Zooplankton —-> Fish —-> Big fish
Solution :
(a) Food chain generally consists of three or four steps because after that the energy available
for the next organism will be so small that it will be insufficient to sustain the life of that
organism.
(b)

1.  Small algae can trap only 1% of the sun’s energy falling on them. 1% of 10,000 J is 100
J, so the small algae have 100 J of energy available.

2. Small algae are eaten up by zooplankton. According to the 10% law, 10% of 100 J is 10 J
of energy which is available in zooplankton.

3. The zooplankton will transfer 10% of its 10 J energy to the fish. Thus, the food energy
available to the fish will be 10% of 10 J, which is 1 J.

4. 10% of 1 J will be transferred to big fish which will be 0.1 J. The above result can be
clearly shown as:



Question 38:
(a) Name and state the law given by Lindeman which tells us how much energy entering a
particular trophic
level of organisms is available for trasnsfer to the next higher trophic level.
(b) How much energy will be available to hawks in the food chain comprising hawk, snake,
paddy and mice, if 10,000 J of energy is available to paddy from the sun ?
Solution :
(a) The law given by Lindeman is 10% law. According to 10% law, only 10% of the energy
entering a particular trophic level of organisms is available for transfer to next higher trophic
level.
(b)

1. Paddy can trap only 1% of the sun’s energy falling on them. 1% of 10,000 J is 100 J, so
paddy have 100 J of energy available in them as food.

2. Paddy is eaten up by mice. Now according to the 10% law, 10% of 100 J is 10 J of energy
which is available in mice.

3. The mice will transfer 10% of its 10 J energy to the snake. Thus, the food energy
available to the snake will be 10% of 10 J, which is 1 J.

4. 10% of 1 J will be transferred to hawk which will be 0.1 J.



 Refraction Of Light

Question 1:
If a ray of light goes from a rarer medium to a denser medium, will it bend towards the normal
or away from it ?
Solution :
It will bend towards the normal.

Question 2:
If a ray of light goes from a denser medium to a rarer medium, will it bend towards the normal
or away from the normal ?
Solution :
It will bend away from the normal.

Question 3:
A beam of light travelling in a rectangular glass slab emerges into air. Draw a ray-diagram
indicating the change in its path.
Solution :
A ray of light travelling from the glass slabs and emerges into the air.

Question 4:
A beam of light travelling in air is incident on water. Draw a ray-diagram indicating the change



in its path in water.
Solution :

Question 5:
A ray of light travelling in water emerges into air. Draw a ray-diagram indicating the change in
its path.
Solution :
A ray of light travelling through water to air.

Question 6:
A ray of light travelling in air is incident on a parallel-sided glass slab (or rectangular glass
slab). Draw a ray-diagram indicating the change in its path in glass.
Solution :
A ray of light incidence on parallel sided glass slab.

Question 7:
A ray of light travelling in glass emerges into air. State whether it will bend towards the normal
or away from the normal.
Solution :
The ray of light will bend away from the normal.



Question 8:
A ray of light travelling in air enters obliquely into water. Does the ray of light bend towards the
normal or away from the normal ? Why ?
Solution :
The ray of light bends towards the normal. This is because water is an optically denser
medium than air.

Question 9:
A ray of light goes from water into air. Will it bend towards the normal or away from the normal
?
Solution :
It will bend away from the normal.

Question 10:
State two effects caused by the refraction of light.
Solution :
Two effects caused by refraction of light are:
– a pool of water appears to be less deep than it actually is.
– an object placed under water appears to be raised.

Question 11:
Name the phenomenon due to which a swimming pool appears less deep than it really is.
Solution :
This is due to refraction of light.

Question 12:
When a ray of light passes from air into glass, is the angle of refraction greater than or less
than the angle of incidence ?
Solution :
Angle of refraction is less than the angle of incidence.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:220

Question 13:
A ray of light passes from air into a block of glass. Does it bend towards the normal or away
from it ?
Solution :
A ray of light travelling from air to glass block, will bend towards the normal.

Question 14:
As light rays pass from water into glass, are they refracted towards the normal or away from
the normal ?
Solution :
A ray of light travelling from water into glass will bend towards the normal.

Question 15:
In which material do you think light rays travel faster-glass or air ?
Solution :
Light rays travel faster in air.

Question 16:



Which phenomenon of light makes the water to appear shallower than it really is ?
Solution :
Refraction of light.

Question 17:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Refraction occurs because light slows down in denser materials.
Solution :
True.

Question 18:
Why does a ray of light bend when it travels from one medium to another ?
Solution :
A ray of light bends when it travels from one medium to another due to the change in the
speed of light.

Question 19:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Light travelling along a normal is…………
(b) Light bends when it passes from water into air. We say that it is……………
Solution :
(a) not.
(b) refracted.

Question 20:
What is meant by ‘refraction of light’ ? Draw a labelled ray diagram to show the refraction of
light.
Solution :
The change in direction of light when it passes from one medium to another obliquely, is
called refraction of light.

Question 21:
A ray of light travelling in air is incident on a rectangular glass block and emerges out into the
air from the opposite face. Draw a labelled ray diagram to show the complete path of this ray
of light. Mark the two points where the refraction of light takes place. What can you say about
the final direction of ray of light ?
Solution :



The final direction of the ray of light is same as the incident direction.

Question 22:
Draw a labelled ray diagram to show how a ray of light is refracted when it passes :
(a) from air into an optically denser medium.
(b) from an optically denser medium into air.
Solution :
(a) Ray of light travelling from air into an optically denser medium.

Question 23:
The diagram given alongside shows a ray of light entering a rectangular block of glass.
(a) Copy the diagram and draw the normal at the point of entry.
(b) Draw the approximate path of the ray of light through the glass block and out of the other
side.



Solution :

Question 24:
What is meant by the ‘angle of incidence’ and the ‘angle of refraction’ for a ray of light ? Draw a
labelled ray diagram to show the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction for a refracted
ray of light.
Solution :
The angle between the incident ray and normal at the point of incidence is called angle of
incidence.
The angle between the refracted ray and normal at the point of refraction is called angle of
refraction.



Question 25:
Light travels more quickly through water than through glass.
(a) Which is optically denser : water or glass ?
(b) If a ray of light passes from glass into water, which way will it bend : towards the normal or
away from the normal ?
Solution :
(a) Glass is optically denser than the water.
(b) The ray will bend away from the normal.

Question 26:
Draw a labelled ray diagram to show how a ray of light passes through a parallel sided glass
block :
(a) if it hits the glass block at 90° (that is, perpendicular to the glass block)
(b) if it hits the glass block at an angle other than 90° (that is, obliquely to the glass block).
Solution :

Question 27:
When a light ray passes from air into glass, what happens to its speed ? Draw a diagram to
show which way the ray of light bends.
Solution :

Question 28:



(a) Explain why, a stick half immersed in water appears to be bent at the surface. Draw a
labelled diagram
to illustrate your answer.
(b) A coin in a glass tumbler appears to rise as the glass tumbler is slowly filled with water.
Name the phenomenon responsible for this effect.
Solution :
(a) The apparent bending of the stick is due to the refraction of light when it passes from
water into air.
A ray of light OC coming from O passes from water into air and gets refracted away from
normal (along CX). Another ray OD gets refracted along DY. The two refracted rays CX and DY,
when produced backwards, appear to meet at point I. Thus, I is the virtual image of the end O
of the stick. So, the stick appears to be bent as shown below.

(b) This phenomenon is due to the refraction of light as it comes out from water into air?

Question 29:
(a) With the help of a labelled diagram, explain why a tank full of water appears less deep than
it actually is.
(b) Name the phenomenon due to which a pencil partly immersed in water and held obliquely
appears to be bent at the water surface.
Solution :
(a) If we look into a tank of water, it appears to be less deep than it really is. This is due to the
refraction of light which takes place when light rays pass from the tank of water into air. When
we look into the tank, we do not see the actual bottom of the tank, we see a virtual image of
the bottom of the pool which is formed by the refraction of light coming from the water into
the air.

(b) Refraction of light.

Question 30:



(a) With the help of a diagram, show how when light falls obliquely on the side of a rectangular
glass slab,
the emergent ray is parallel to the incident ray.
(b) Show the lateral displacement of the ray on the diagram.
(c) State two factors on which the lateral displacement of the emergent ray depends.
Solution :

(a)

(b) The lateral displacement is shown in the above diagram.
(c) Factors on which the lateral displacement depends are:
(i) Angle of incidence
(ii) Thickness of glass slab
(iii) Refractive index of glass slab

Question 31:
Explain with the help of a labelled ray diagram, why a pencil partly immersed in water appears
to be bent at the water surface. State whether the bending of pencil will increase or decrease if
water is replaced by another liquid which is optically more dense than water. Give reason for
your answer.
Solution :
A pencil placed in water appears to be bent because of refraction of light. The refraction
causes an apparent shift in the position of the part of the pencil within the water.



If water is replaced by another liquid which is optically more dense than water, then the
bending of the pencil will increase. This is because the optically denser medium will cause
more refraction of light rays.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:221

Question 39:
Which of the following diagrams shows the ray of light refracted correctly ?

Solution :
E.

Question 40:
A vertical ray of light strikes the horizontal surface of some water :
(a) What is the angle of incidence ?
(b) What is the angle of refraction ?
Solution :
(a) 00

(b) 00

Question 41:
How is the reflection of light ray from a plane mirror different from the refraction of light ray as
it enters a block of glass ?
Solution :
The angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence but the angle of refraction is not equal
to the angle of incidence.

Question 42:
How does the light have to enter the glass :
(a) to produce a large amount of bending ?
(b) for no refraction to happen ?
Solution :
(a) Obliquely; making a large angle of incidence.
(b) Perpendicular to the glass surface.



Question 43:
(a) How can you bend light away from the normal ?
(b) How must light travel out of a substance if it is not going to be refracted ?
Solution :
(a) By making the light enter from a denser medium to a rarer medium.
(b) Incidence should be at right angle to the surface of substance.

Question 44:
Draw and complete the following diagrams to show what happens to the beams of light as
they enter the glass block and then leave it :

Solution :

Question 45:
Why does a beam of light bend when it enters glass at an angle ? Why does it not bend if it
enters the glass at right angles ?
Solution :
A beam of light bends when it enters glass at an angle. This is due to refraction of light. It does
not bend if it enters the glass at right angles because no refraction will occur in this case, the
angle of incidence in this case is zero and angle of refraction is also zero.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:227

Question 1:
What name is given to the ratio of sine of angle of incidence to the sine of angle of refraction ?
Solution :
Refractive index.

Question 2:
Write the relation between the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction for a medium.
Solution :
Refractive index= sine of the angle of incidence/sine of the angle of refraction.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:228

Question 3:
What is the unit of refractive index ?
Solution :
Refractive index has no units.



Question 4:
Which has higher refractive index : water or glass ?
Solution :
Glass has higher refractive index.

Question 5:
Refractive indices of carbon disulphide and ethyl alcohol are 1.63 and 1.36 respectively. Which
is optically denser ?
Solution :
Carbon disulphide is more denser than the ethyl alcohol.

Question 6:
The refractive index of diamond is 2.42. What is the meaning of this statement in relation to
the speed of light ?
Solution :
This means that the ratio of the speed of light in air to the speed of light in diamond is equal to
2.42.

Question 7:
If the refractive index for light going from air to diamond be 2.42, what will be the refractive
index for light going from diamond to air ?
Solution :

Question 8:
How is the refractive index of a material related to the speed of light in it ?
Solution :

Question 9:
Fill in the following blank with a suitable word :
When a ray of light goes from air into a clear material, you see the ray bend. How much the ray
bends is determined by the………………………. of the material.
Solution :
Refractive index.

Question 10:
Give three examples of materials that refract light rays. What happens to the speed of light
rays when they enter these materials ?
Solution :
Three examples of materials that refract light rays are water, glass and diamond. When light
rays (travelling in air) enter these materials, their speed decreases.

Question 11:
Define Snell’s law of refraction. A ray of light is incident on a glass slab at an angle of
incidence of 60°. If the angle of refraction be 32.7°, calculate the refractive index of glass.



(Given : sin 60° = 0.866, and sin 32.7° = 540).
Solution :

Question 12:
The speed of light in vacuum and in two different glasses is given in the table below :

(a) Calculate the absolute refractive indexes of flint glass and crown glass.
(b) Calculate the relative refractive index for light going from crown glass to flint glass.
Solution :

Question 13:
The speed of light in air is 3 × 108 m/s. In medium X its speed is 2 × 108 m/s and in medium Y
the speed of light is 2.5 × 108 m/s. Calculate:
(a) air nx (b) air ny (c) xny
Solution :



Question 14:

What is the speed of light in a medium of refractive index  if its speed in air is 3,00,000 km/s ?
Solution :

Question 15:
The refractive index of glass is 1.5. Calculate the speed of light in glass. The speed of light in
air is 3.0 × 108 ms-1.
Solution :

Question 16:
8 8



The speed of light in water is 2.25 × 108 m/s. If the speed of light in vacuum be 3 × 108 m/s,
calculate the refractive index of water.
Solution :

Question 17:
Light enters from air into diamond which has a refractive index of 2.42. Calculate the speed of
light in diamond. The speed of light in air is 3.0 × 108 ms-1.
Solution :

Question 18:
(a) State and explain the laws of refraction of light with the help of a labelled diagram.
(b) What is meant by the refractive index of a substance ?
(c) Light travels through air at 300 million ms-1. On entering water it slows down to 225 million
ms-1. Calculate the refractive index of water.
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:229

Question 29:
The following table gives the refractive indices of a few media :

Use this table to give an example of :
(i) a medium pair so that light speeds up when it goes from one of these medium to another.
(ii) a medium pair so that light slows down when it goes from one of these medium to
another.
Solution :
(i) Crown glass to water.
(ii) Water to diamond.

Question 30:
Refractive indices of four media A, B, C and D are given below :

In which of these four media is the speed of light (i) maximum, and (ii) minimum ?
Solution :
(i) A (It has least refractive index).
(ii) D (It has highest refractive index).

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:239

Question 1:
Name the lens which can concentrate sun’s rays to a point and burn a hole in a piece of paper.
Solution :



Converging lens.

Question 2:
Give the usual name for the following :
A point inside a lens through which the light passes undeviated.
Solution :
Optical center.

Question 3:
A 1 cm high object is placed at a distance of 2ƒ from a convex lens. What is the height of the
image formed ?
Solution :
1 cm (same as the height of the object).

Question 4:
If the image formed by a convex lens is of the same size as that of the object, what is the
position of the image with respect to the lens ?
Solution :
At 2F (At twice the focal length).

Question 5:
If an object is placed at the focus of a convex lens, where is the image formed ?
Solution :
The image is formed at infinity (at very large distance).

Question 6:
Where should an object be placed in order to use a convex lens as a magnifying glass ?
Solution :
Object should be placed at a distance less than focal length.

Question 7:
Where should an object be placed in front of a convex lens so as to obtain its virtual, erect and
magnified image ?
Solution :
The object should be placed within focus.

Question 8:
Where should an object be placed in front of a convex lens so as to obtain its real, inverted and
magnified image ?
Solution :
Object should be placed between f and 2f.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:240

Question 9:
For what position of an object a real, diminished image is formed by a convex lens ?
Solution :
Beyond 2F.

Question 10:
If an object is at a considerable distance (or infinity) in front of a convex lens, where is the
image formed ?



Solution :
At focus F.

Question 11:
Draw the given diagram in your answer book and complete it for the path of a ray of light after
passing through the lens.

Solution :

Question 12:
What type of lens would you use as a magnifying glass ? How close must the object be to the
lens ?
Solution :
Convex lens
The object must be withing the focus of the lens.

Question 13:
Name two factors on which the focal length of a lens depends.
Solution :
Focal length of a lens depends on the refractive index of the glass from which it is made, and
on the curvature of its two surfaces.

Question 14:
State any two uses of convex lenses.
Solution :
Two uses of convex lenses:-
1. As a magnifying glass.
2. For making a simple camera.

Question 15:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Parallel rays of light are refracted by a convex lens to a point called the……….
(b) The image in a convex lens depends upon the distance of the…………. from the lens.
Solution :
a) focus.
b) object.

Question 16:
What is a lens ? Distinguish between a convex lens and a concave lens. Which of the two is a



converging lens : convex lens or concave lens ?
Solution :
A lens is a piece of transparent glass bound by two spherical surfaces.
A convex lens is thicker at the middle as compared to the edges; while a concave lens is
thicker at the edges as compared to the middle.
Convex lens is converging lens.

Question 17:
(a) Explain with the help of a diagram, why the convex lens is also called a converging lens.
(b) Define principal axis, principal focus and focal length of a convex lens.
Solution :
(a) A convex lens also known as converging type because it converges a parallel beam of light
rays passing through it.

(b) Principle axis: The principal axis of a lens is a line passing throught the optical centre of the
lens and perpendicular to both the faces of the lens.
Principle focus: The principal focus of a convex lens is a point on its principal axis to which
light rays parallel to the principal axis converge after passing through the lens.
Focal length: The distance of the principle focus from the optical center of a lens is called its
focal length.

Question 18:
(a) Explain with the help of a diagram, why the concave lens is also called a diverging lens.
(b) Define the principal focus of a concave lens.
Solution :
(a) A concave lens is known as diverging lens because it diverges the parallel rays of light
passing through it.

(b) The principal focus of a concave lens is a point on its principal axis from which light rays,
originally parallel to the axis, appear to diverge after passing through the lens.

Question 19:
Draw a ray diagram to show the formation of a real magnified image by a convex lens. (In your
sketch the position of object and image with respect to the principal focus of lens should be
shown clearly).



Solution :
Formation of real magnified image by a convex lens.

Question 20:
Describe with the help of a ray-diagram, the formation of image of a finite object placed in front
of a convex lens between ƒ and 2ƒ Give two characteristics of the image so formed.
Solution :
If object is placed in between f and 2f, the image will form on the other side of the lens beyond
2f as shown below.

Characteristics of image formed:
Image formed is real and inverted.
Image formed is magnified.

Question 21:
Describe with the help of a ray diagram the nature, size and position of the image formed when
an object is placed in front of a convex lens between focus and optical centre. State three
characteristics of the image formed.
Solution :
In the diagram, the object is placed in front of a convex lens between focus and optical centre.
The image is formed on the same side as the object as shown below.



Characteristics of image formed:
Image is virtual and erect.
Image is larger than the object
Image is formed behind the object.

Question 22:
An object is placed at a distance equal to 2ƒ in front of a convex lens. Draw a labelled ray
diagram to show the formation of image. State two characteristics of the image formed.
Solution :

Characteristic of image formed:
Image formed is real and inverted.
Image is of same size as the object

Question 23:
Describe with the help of a ray-diagram, the size, nature and position of the image formed by a
convex lens when an object is placed beyond 2f in front of the lens.
Solution :
When an object is placed beyond 2f in front of a convex lens, then the image formed is
between f and 2f on the other side of the lens, it is real, inverted and smaller than the object.

Question 24:
Describe with the help of a ray diagram the nature, size and position of the image formed when
an object is placed at infinity (considerable distance) in front of a convex lens. State three
characteristics of the image so formed.
Solution :
When an object is placed at infinity in front of a convex lens, the image is formed at the focus
on the other side of the lens.



Characteristics of image formed:
Image is real.
Image is inverted.
Image is highly diminished.

Question 25:
(a) What type of lens is shown in the diagram on the right ? What will happen to the parallel
rays of light ? Show by completing the ray diagram.
(b) Your eye contains a convex lens. Why is it unwise to look at the sun ?

Solution :
(a) The lens shown in convex. the parallel rays will converge to a point called focus (F).

(b) It is unwise to look at the sun because the convex lens focusses a lot of sun rays into our
eyes and this may damage them.

Question 26:
Where must the object be placed for the image formed by a converging lens to be :
(a) real, inverted and smaller than the object ?
(b) real, inverted and same size as the object ?
(c) real, inverted and larger than the object ?
(d) virtual, upright and larger than the object ?
Solution :
a) Beyond 2F
b) At 2F
c) Between F and 2F
d) Between F and optical centre

Question 27:
Draw a diagram to show how a converging lens held close to the eye acts as a magnifying
glass. Why is it usual to choose a lens of short focal length for this purpose rather than one of



long focal length ?
Solution :
Converging lens as a magnifying glass:

It is usual to choose a lens of short focal length for this purpose rather than one of long focal
length because smaller the focal length of a convex lens, greater will be its magnifying power.

Question 28:
How could you find the focal length of a convex lens rapidly but approximately ?
Solution :
To determine the focal length of a convex lens, we put the convex lens in a holder and keep it
in front of a distant object like a window or tree, so that the rays coming from the window pass
through it. A cardboard screen is put behind the lens. We change the distance of the screen
from the convex lens until a clear inverted image of the window is formed on the screen.
Measure the distance of the screen from the lens with a scale. This distance will be the focal
length of convex lens.

Question 29:
(a) With the help of a labelled diagram explain how a convex lens converges a beam of parallel
light rays.
Mark the principal axis, optical centre, principal focus and focal length of the convex lens on
the diagram.
(b) State whether convex lens has a real focus or a virtual focus.
(c) List some things that convex lens and concave mirror have in common.
Solution :
(a) When a beam of light rays parallel to one another and also to the principal axis of the
convex lens fall on the lens, the incident rays pass through the lens and get refracted
according to the laws of refraction. All the rays, after passing through the lens, converge at the
same point F (focus) on the other side of the lens.

(b) A convex lens has a real focus.
(c) Both, convex lens and concave mirror, converge parallel rays of light coming from infinity
(parallel to the principal axis) at the focus.



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:241

Question 30:
(a) With the help of a labelled diagram, explain how a concave lens diverges a beam of parallel
light rays.
Mark the principal axis, optical centre, principal focus and focal length of the concave lens on
the diagram.
(b) State whether concave lens has a real focus or a virtual focus.
(c) List some things that concave lens and convex mirror have in common.
Solution :

When a beam of light rays parallel to one another and also to the principal axis of the concave
lens fall on the lens, the incident rays pass through the lens and get refracted according to the
laws of refraction. All the rays spread out after passing through the lens. These diverging rays
when produced backwards appear to meet at a point F (focus) on the left side of the lens.
(b) A concave lens has a virtual focus.
(c) Both, concave lens and convex mirror, diverge parallel rays of light coming from infinity
(parallel to the principal axis).

Question 31:
Draw ray diagrams to represent the nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a
convex lens for the object placed :
(a) at 2F1,
(b) between F1and the optical centre O of the lens.
Which of the above two cases shows the use of convex lens as a magnifying glass ? Give
reasons for your choice.
Solution :



Question 32:
(a) An object is placed well outside the principal focus of a convex lens. Draw a ray diagram to
show how
the image is formed, and say whether the image is real or virtual.
(b) What is the effect on the size and position of the image of moving the object (i) towards
the lens, and (ii) away from the lens ?
Solution :
(a).

(b)
(i) If object is moved towards the lens, the image size will keep on increasing till the object
reaches focus. After that, the size decreases but the image remains magnified. The image
keeps movingvaway from the lens (on the opposite side of the lens) till the object reaches
focus; after that the image is formed on the same side of the lens as the object.
(ii) If object is moved away from the lens, the size will keep on decreasing and the image
keeps on shifting towards the lens.

Question 33:
(a) Explain what is meant by a virtual, magnified image.
(b) Draw a ray diagram to show the formation of a virtual magnified image of an object by a
convex lens. In your diagram, the position of object and image with respect to the principal
focus should be shown clearly.
(c) Three convex lenses are available having focal lengths of 4 cm, 40 cm and 4 m



respectively. Which one would you choose as a magnifying glass and why ?
Solution :
(a) A virtual magnified image is the one which cannot be taken on a screen and whose size is
larger than that of the object.

Question 34:
(a) Explain why, a real image can be projected on a screen but a virtual image cannot.
(b) Draw a ray diagram to show the formation of a real diminished image of an object by a
convex lens. In your diagram, the position of object and image with respect to the principal
focus should be shown clearly.
(c) Name one simple optical instrument in which the above arrangement of convex lens is
used.
Solution :
a) A real image can be projected on a screen but a virtual image cannot because a real image
is formed when light rays coming from an object actually meet at a point after refraction
through a lens while a virtual image is formed when light rays coming from an object only
appear to meet at a point when produced backwards (but do not actually meet) after
refraction through a lens.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:242

Question 46:
A lens of focal length 12 cm forms an erect image three times the size of the object. The
distance between the object and image is :
(a) 8 cm (b) 16 cm (c) 24 cm (d) 36 cm
Solution :



Question 47:
If an object is placed 21 cm from a converging lens, the image formed is slightly smaller than
the object. If the object is placed 19 cm from the lens, the image formed is slightly larger than
the object. The approximate focal length of the lens is :
(a) 5 cm (b) 10 cm (c) 18 cm (d) 20 cm
Solution :
(b) 10 cm
The image is slightly smaller than the object when the object lies beyond 2f; and the image is
slightly larger than the object when the object between f and 2f. This means that between 21
cm and 19 cm lies 2f. Out of the given options, 20 cm lies between 21 cm and 19 cm.
So, 2f = 20 cm.
f = 10 cm.

Question 48:
An object is placed at the following distances from a convex lens of focal length 15 cm :
(a) 35 cm (b) 30 cm (c) 20 cm (d) 10 cm
Which position of the object will produce :
(i) a magnified real image ?
(ii) a magnified virtual image ?
(iii) a diminished real image ?
(iv) an image of same size as the object ?
Solution :
Here, f=15cm and 2f=30cm
(i) 20 cm (Because a magnified real image is formed when the object is placed between f and
2f).
(ii) 10cm (Because a magnified virtual image is formed when the object is placed between f
and the lens).
(iii) 35cm (Because a diminished real image is formed when the object is placed beyonf 2f).
(iv) 30cm (Because an image of same size as the object is formed when the object is placed
at 2f).

Question 49:
When an object is placed at a distance of 36 cm from a convex lens, an image of the same
size as the object is formed. What will be the nature of image formed when the object is
placed at a distance of:
(a) 10 cm from the lens ? (b) 20 cm from the lens ?
Solution :
Here, 2f = 36 cm, f = 18 cm.
(a) When the object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from the lens, the object lies within the



focus. Hence, the image formed is virtual, erect and magnified.
(b) When the object is placed at a distance of 20 cm from the lens, the object lies between f
and 2f. Hence, the image formed is real, inverted and magnified.

Question 50:
(a) Draw a diagram to show how a converging lens focusses parallel rays of light.
(b) How would you alter the above diagram to show how a converging lens can produce a
beam of parallel rays of light.
Solution :
(a) A converging lens focusses parallel ray of light as shown below:

(b) Place a source of light at the focus of the converging lens.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:246

Question 1:
Write the formula for a lens connecting image distance (υ),object distance (u)and the focal
length (ƒ).How does the lens formula differ from the mirror formula ?
Solution :

Question 2:
Write down the magnification formula for a lens in terms of object distance and image
distance. How does this magnification formula for a lens differ from the corresponding
formula for a mirror ?
Solution :

Question 3:
What is the nature of the image formed by a convex lens if the magnification produced by the
lens is +3 ?
Solution :
The image will be virtual and erect, since the magnification has positive value.



Question 4:
What is the nature of the image formed by a convex lens if the magnification produced by the
lens is, – 0.5 ?
Solution :
The image will be real and inverted, since the magnification has negative value.

Question 5:
What is the position of image when an object is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a convex
lens of focal length 10 cm ?
Solution :

Question 6:
Describe the nature of image formed when an object is placed at a distance of 30 cm from a
convex lens of focal length 15 cm.
Solution :
Since the object is placed at a distance greater than the focal length of the convex lens, so the
image formed is real and inverted.

Question 7:
At what distance from a converging lens of focal length 12 cm must an object be placed in
order that an image of magnification 1 will be produced ?
Solution :

Question 8:
State and explain the New Cartesian Sign Convention for spherical lenses.
Solution :
New Cartesian Sign Convention for spherical lenses:
(i) All the distances are measured from the optical centre of the lens.
(ii) The distances measured in the same direction as that of incident light are taken as positive.



(iii) The distances measured against the direction of incident light are taken as negative.
(iv) The distances measured upward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as
positive.
(v) The distances measured downward and perpendicular to the principal axis are taken as
negative.

Question 9:
An object 4 cm high is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a convex lens of focal length 20 cm.
Find the position, nature and size of the image.
Solution :

Question 10:
A small object is so placed in front of a convex lens of 5 cm focal length that a virtual image is
formed at a distance of 25 cm. Find the magnification.
Solution :

Question 11:
Find the position and nature of the image of an object 5 cm high and 10 cm in front of a
convex lens of focal length 6 cm.
Solution :



Question 12:
Calculate the focal length of a convex lens which produces a virtual image at a distance of 50
cm of an object placed 20 cm in front of it.
Solution :

Question 13:
An object is placed at a distance of 100 cm from a converging lens of focal length 40 cm.
(i) What is the nature of image ?
(ii) What is the position of image ?
A convex lens produces an inverted image magnified three times of an object placed at a
distance of 15 cm from it. Calculate focal length of the lens.
Solution :

Question 14:
A convex lens produces an inverted image magnified three times of an object placed at a
distance of 15 cm from it. Calculate focal length of the lens.
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:247

Question 15:
A converging lens of focal length 5 cm is placed at a distance of 20 cm from a screen. How far
from the lens should an object be placed so as to form its real image on the screen ?
Solution :

Question 16:
An object 5 cm high is held 25 cm away from a converging lens of focal length 10 cm. Find the
position, size and nature of the image formed. Also draw the ray diagram.
Solution :



Question 17:
At what distance should an object be placed from a convex lens of focal length 18 cm to
obtain an image at 24 cm from it on the other side ? What will be the magnification produced
in this case ?
Solution :

Question 18:
An object 2 cm tall is placed on the axis of a convex lens of focal length 5 cm at a distance of
10 m from the optical centre of the lens. Find the nature, position and size of the image
formed. Which case of image formation by convex lenses is illustrated by this example ?
Solution :



Question 19:
The filament of a lamp is 80 cm from a screen and a converging lens forms an image of it on a
screen, magnified three times. Find the distance of the lens from the filament and the focal
length of the lens.
Solution :

Question 20:
An erect image 2.0 cm high is formed 12 cm from a lens, the object being 0.5 cm high. Find
the focal length of the lens.
Solution :

Question 21:
A convex lens of focal length 0.10 m is used to form a magnified image of an object of height



5 mm placed at a distance of 0.08 m from the lens. Calculate the position, nature and size of
the image.
Solution :

Question 22:
A convex lens of focal length 6 cm is held 4 cm from a newspaper which has print 0.5 cm high.
By calculation, determine the size and nature of the image produced.
Solution :

Question 23:
Determine how far an object must be placed in front of a converging lens of focal length 10 cm
in order to produce an erect (upright) image of linear magnification 4.
Solution :

Question 24:



A lens of focal length 20 cm is used to produce a ten times magnified image of a film slide on
a screen. How far must the slide be placed from the lens ?
Solution :

Question 25:
An object placed 4 cm in front of a converging lens produces a real image 12 cm from the lens.
(a) What is the magnification of the image ?
(b) What is the focal length of the lens ?
(c) Draw a ray diagram to show the formation of image. Mark clearly F and 2F in the diagram.
Solution :

Question 26:
(a) An object 2 cm tall stands on the principal axis of a converging lens of focal length 8 cm.
Find the position, nature and size of the image formed if the object is :
(i) 12 cm from the lens
(ii) 6 cm from the lens
(b) State one practical application each of the use of such a lens with the object in position (i)
and (ii).
Solution :



Question 27:
(a) An object 3 cm high is placed 24 cm away from a convex lens of focal length 8 cm. Find by
calculations, the position, height and nature of the image.
(b) If the object is moved to a point only 3 cm away from the lens, what is the new position,
height and nature of the image ?
(c) Which of the above two cases illustrates the working of a magnifying glass ?
Solution :



Question 28:
(a) Find the nature, position and magnification of the images formed by a convex lens of focal
length 0.20 m if the object is placed at a distance of :
(i) 0.50 m (ii) 0.25 m (iii) 0.15 m
(b) Which of the above cases represents the use of convex lens in a film projector, in a camera,
and as a magnifying glass ?
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:248

Question 41:
A student did an experiment with a convex lens. He put an object at different distances 25 cm,
30 cm, 40 cm, 60 cm and 120 cm from the lens. In each case he measured the distance of the
image from the lens. His results were 100 cm, 24 cm, 60 cm, 30 cm and 40 cm, respectively.
Unfortunately his results are written in wrong order.
(a) Rewrite the image distances in the correct order.
(b) What would be the image distance if the object distance was 90 cm ?
(c) Which of the object distances gives the biggest image ?
(d) What is the focal length of this lens ?
Solution :



Question 42:
A magnifying lens has a focal length of 100 mm. An object whose size is 16 mm is placed at
some distance from the lens so that an image is formed at a distance of 25 cm in front of the
lens.
(a) What is the distance between the object and the lens ?
(b) Where should the object be placed if the image is to form at infinity ?
Solution :

Question 43:
A lens forms a real image 3 cm high of an object 1 cm high. If the separation of object and
image is 15 cm, find the focal length of the lens.
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:249

Question 44:
An object 50 cm tall is placed on the principal axis of a convex lens. Its 20 cm tall image is
formed on the screen placed at a distance of 10 cm from the lens. Calculate the focal length of
the lens.
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:251

Question 1:
If the image formed by a lens is always diminished and erect, what is the nature of the lens ?
Solution :
Concave lens.

Question 2:
Copy and complete the diagram below to show what happens to the rays of light when they
pass through the concave lens :

Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:252

Question 3:
Which type of lenses are :
(a) thinner in the middle than at the edges ?
(b) thicker in the middle than at the edges ?
Solution :
(a) Concave lenses.
(b) Convex lenses.

Question 4:
A ray of light is going towards the focus of a concave lens. Draw a ray diagram to show the
path of this ray of light after refraction through the lens.
Solution :

Question 5:
(a) What type of images can a convex lens make ?
(b) What type of image is always made by a concave lens ?
Solution :
(a) Real and virtual.
(b) Virtual.

Question 6:
Take down this figure into your answer book and complete the path of the ray.

Solution :



Question 7:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) A convex lens……. rays of light, whereas a concave lens……….. rays of light.
(b) Lenses refract light to form images : a……… lens can form both real and virtual images, but
a diverging
lens forms only……….. images.
Solution :
(a) converges; diverges
(b) converging; virtual

Question 8:
Things always look small on viewing through a lens. What is the nature of the lens ?
Solution :
Concave lens.

Question 9:
An object lies at a distance of 2ƒ from a concave lens of focal length ƒ. Draw a ray-diagram to
illustrate the image formation.
Solution :

Question 10:
Show by drawing a ray-diagram that the image of an object formed by a concave lens is
virtual, erect and diminished.
Solution :



Question 11:
Give the position, size and nature of image formed by a concave lens when the object is
placed :
(a) anywhere between optical centre and infinity.
(b) at infinity.
Solution :
(a) When the object is placed anywhere between optical centre and infinity, the image is
formed between optical centre and focus. It is diminished, virtual and erect.
(b) When the object is placed at infinity, the image is formed at focus. It is highly diminished,
virtual and erect.

Question 12:
Which type of lens is : (a) a converging lens, and which is (b) a diverging lens ? Explain your
answer with diagrams.
Solution :
(a) A convex lens is a converging lens because it converges a parallel beam of light rays
passing through it at its focus.

Question 13:



With the help of a diagram, explain why the image of an object viewed through a concave lens
appears smaller and closer than the object.
Solution :
(a) Smaller.
(b) Bigger.
Image is virtual in both the cases.

Question 14:
How would a pencil look like if you saw it through (a) a concave lens, and (b) a convex lens ?
(Assume the pencil is close to the lens). Is the image real or virtual ?
Solution :
(a)

(b) Use of convex mirror: As rear-view mirror in vehicles
Use of concave mirror: As shaving mirrors
Use of convex lens: For making simple camera
Use of concave lens: As eye-lens in Galilean telescope

Question 15:
(a) An object is placed 10 cm from a lens of focal length 5 cm. Draw the ray diagrams to show



the formation
of image if the lens is (i) converging, and (ii) diverging.
(b) State one practical use each of convex mirror, concave mirror, convex lens and concave
lens.
Solution :

Question 16:
(a) Construct ray diagrams to illustrate the formation of a virtual image using (i) a converging
lens, and
(ii) a diverging lens.
(b) What is the difference between the two images formed above ?
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:253

Question 23:
When an object is placed 10 cm in front of lens A, the image is real, inverted, magnified and
formed at a great distance. When the same object is placed 10 cm in front of lens B, the image
formed is real, inverted and same size as the object.
(a) What is the focal length of lens A ?
(b) What is the focal length of lens B ?
(c) What is the nature of lens A ?
(d) What is the nature of lens B ?
Solution :
(a) The object is placed at focus, so f=10 cm.
(b) the object is placed at a distance twice the focallength, so f=5 cm.
(c) Convex lens (since image is real).
(d) Convex lens (since image is real).

Question 24:
When a fork is seen through lenses A and B one by one, it appears as shown in the diagrams.
What is the nature of (i) lens A, and (ii) lens B ? Give reason for your answer.

Solution :
(i) Concave lens because of negative magnification.



(ii) Convex lens because of positive magnification.

Question 25:
What kind of lens can form :
(a) an inverted magnified image ?
(b) an erect magnified image ?
(c) an inverted diminished image ?
(d) an erect diminished image ?
Solution :
(a) Convex lens.
(b) Convex lens.
(c) Convex lens.
(d) Concave lens.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:255

Question 1:
The lens A produces a magnification of, – 0.6 whereas lens B produces a magnification of +
0.6.
(a) What is the nature of lens A ?
(b) What is the nature of lens B ?
Solution :
(a) Convex lens (since image is real, inverted and diminished).
(b) Concave lens (since image is virtual, erect and diminished).

Question 2:
A 50 cm tall object is at a very large distance from a diverging lens. A virtual, erect and
diminished image of the object is formed at a distance of 20 cm in front of the lens. How much
is the focal length of the lens ?
Solution :
When an object is placed at a very large distance from a diverging lens, then image is formed
at the focus of the lens.
Therefore, the focal length of the lens is 20 cm.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:256

Question 3:
An object is placed at a distance of 4 cm from a concave lens of focal length 12 cm. Find the
position and nature of the image.
Solution :



Question 4:
A concave lens of focal length 15 cm forms an image 10 cm from the lens. How far is the
object placed from the lens ? Draw the ray-diagram.
Solution :

Question 5:
An object 60 cm from a lens gives a virtual image at a distance of 20 cm in front of the lens.
What is the focal length of the lens ? Is the lens converging or diverging ? Give reasons for
your answer.
Solution :

Question 6:
A concave lens of 20 cm focal length forms an image 15 cm from the lens. Compute the
object distance.
Solution :



Question 7:
A concave lens has focal length 15 cm. At what distance should the object from the lens be
placed so that it forms an image at 10 cm from the lens ? Also find the magnification
produced by the lens.
Solution :

Question 8:
Calculate the image distance for an object of height 12 mm at a distance of 0.20 m from a
concave lens of focal length 0.30 m, and state the nature and size of the image.
Solution :

Question 9:
A concave lens has a focal length of 20 cm. At what distance from the lens a 5 cm tall object



be placed so that it forms an image at 15 cm from the lens ? Also calculate the size of the
image formed.
Solution :

Question 10:
An object is placed 20 cm from (a) a converging lens, and (b) a diverging lens, of focal length
15 cm. Calculate the image position and magnification in each case.
Solution :

Question 11:
A 2.0 cm tall object is placed 40 cm from a diverging lens of focal length 15 cm. Find the
position and size of the image.
Solution :



Question 12:
(a) Find the position and size of the virtual image formed when an object 2 cm tall is placed 20
cm from :
(i) a diverging lens of focal length 40 cm.
(ii) a converging lens of focal length 40 cm.
(b) Draw labelled ray diagrams to show the formation of images in cases (i) and (ii)above (The
diagrams may not be according to scale).
Solution :



Question 13:
(a) A small object is placed 150 mm away from a diverging lens of focal length 100 mm.
(i) Copy the figure below and draw rays to show how an image is formed by the lens.

(ii) Calculate the distance of the image from the lens by using the lens formula.
(b) The diverging lens in part (a) is replaced by a converging lens also of focal length 100 mm.
The object remains in the same position and an image is formed by the converging lens.
Compare two properties of this image with those of the image formed by the diverging lens in
part (a).
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:257

Question 18:
A camera fitted with a lens of focal length 50 mm is being used to photograph a flower that is
5 cm in diameter. The flower is placed 20 cm in front of the camera lens.
(a) At what distance from the film should the lens be adjusted to obtain a sharp image of the
flower ?
(b) What would be the diameter of the image of the flower on the film ?
(c) What is the nature of camera lens ?
Solution :

Question 19:



An object is 2 m from a lens which forms an erect image one-fourth (exactly) the size of the
object. Determine the focal length of the lens. What type of lens is this ?
Solution :

Question 20:
An image formed on a screen is three times the size of the object. The object and screen are
80 cm apart when the image is sharply focussed.
(a) State which type of lens is used.
(b) Calculate focal length of the lens.
Solution :

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:261

Question 1:
The lens A has a focal length of 25 cm whereas another lens B has a focal length of 60 cm.
Giving reason state, which lens has more power : A or B
Solution :
Lens A has more power because of its shorter focal length.

Question 2:
Which causes more bending (or more refraction) of light rays passing through it: a convex
lens of long focal length or a convex lens of short focal length ?
Solution :
Convex lens of short focal length causes more bending of light rays passing through it.



Question 3:
Name the physical quantity whose unit is dioptre.
Solution :
Power of a lens.

Question 4:
Define 1 dioptre power of a lens.
Solution :
1 diopter is the power of a lens whose focal length is 1 metre.

Question 5:
Which typie of lens has (a) a positive power, and (b) a negative power ?
Solution :
a) Positive power – Convex lens.
b) Negative power – Concave lens.

Question 6:
Which of the two has a greater power : a lens of short focal length or a lens of large focal
length ?
Solution :
Lens of short focal length.

Question 7:
How is the power of a lens related to its focal length ?
Solution :
Power of lens is reciprocal of its focal length in metres.

Question 8:
Which has more power : a thick convex lens or a thin convex lens, made of the same glass ?
Give reason for your choice.
Solution :
Thick convex lens has more power because of its shorter focal length.

Question 9:
The focal length of a convex lens is 25 cm. What is its power ?
Solution :
f = 25 cm = 0.25 cm.
P = 1/f = 1/0.25 = +4 D.

Question 10:
What is the power of a convex lens of focal length 0.5 m ?
Solution :
f = 0.5 m
P = 1/f = 1/0.5 = +2 D.

Question 11:
A converging lens has a focal length of 50 mm. What is the power of the lens ?
Solution :
f = 50 mm = 0.05 m
P = 1/f = 1/0.05 = +20 D.

Question 12:



What is the power of a convex lens whose focal length is 80 cm ?
Solution :
f = 80 cm = 0.8 m.
P = 1/f = 1/0.8 = +1.25 D.

Question 13:
A diverging lens has a focal length of 3 cm. Calculate the power.
Solution :
Here, f = -3 cm = -0.03 m (Diverging lens)
P = 1/f = 1/(-0.03) = -33.33 D.

Question 14:
The power of a lens is + 0.2 D. Calculate its focal length.
Solution :
P = +0.2 D.
P = 1/f.
f = 1/P = 1/0.2 = +5 m.

Question 15:
The power of a lens is, – 2D. What is its focal length ?
Solution :
P = -2 D.
P = 1/f.
f = 1/P = 1/(-2) = -0.5 m = -50 cm.

Question 16:
What is the nature of a lens having a power of + 0.5 D ?
Solution :
Convex lens.

Question 17:
What is the nature of a lens whose power is, – 4 D ?
Solution :
Concave lens.

Question 18:
The optician’s prescription for a spectacle lens is marked + 0.5 D. What is the :
(a) nature of spectacle lens ?
(b) focal length of spectacle lens ?
Solution :
(a) Convex lens
(b) P = +0.5 D.
P = 1/f.
f = 1/P = 1/0.5 = 2 m.

Question 19:
A doctor has prescribed a corrective lens of power, -1.5 D. Find the focal length of the lens. Is
the prescribed lens diverging or converging ?
Solution :
P = -1.5 D
P = 1/f.
f = 1/P = 1/(-0.5) = -0.66 m = -66.6 m.



Since focal length is negative, it is a diverging lens.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:262

Question 20:
A lens has a focal length of, -10 cm. What is the power of the lens and what is its nature ?
Solution :
f = -10 cm = -0.1 m
P = 1/f = 1/(-0.1) = -10 D
It is a concave lens.

Question 21:
The focal length of a lens is +150 mm. What kind of lens is it and what is its power ?
Solution :
f = +150 mm = +0.15 m
It is a convex lens since its focal length is positive.
P = 1/f = 1/0.15 = +6.66 D

Question 22:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) The reciprocal of the focal length in metres gives you the……….. of the lens, which is
measured in
(b) For converging lenses, the power is……… while for diverging lenses, the power is………….
Solution :
(a) power, dioptres.
(b) positive, negative.

Question 23:
An object of height 4 cm is placed at a distance of 15 cm in front of a concave lens of power, -
10 dioptres. Find the size of the image.
Solution :



Question 24:
An object of height 4.25 mm is placed at a distance of 10 cm from a convex lens of power +5
D. Find (i) focal length of the lens, and (ii) size of the image.
Solution :

Question 25:
A convex lens of power 5 D and a concave lens of power 7.5 D are placed in contact with each
other. What is the :
(a) power of this combination of lenses ?
(b) focal length of this combination of lenses ?



Solution :

Question 26:
A convex lens of focal length 25 cm and a concave lens of focal length 10 cm are placed in
close contact with one another.
(a) What is the power of this combination ?
(b) What is the focal length of this combination ?
(c) Is this combination converging or diverging ?
Solution :

Question 27:
The power of a combination of two lenses X and Y is 5 D. If the focal length of lens X be 15 cm
:
(a) calculate the focal length of lens Y.
(b) state the nature of lens Y.
Solution :

Question 28:
Two lenses A and B have focal lengths of + 20 cm and, -10 cm, respectively.
(a) What is the nature of lens A and lens B ?



(b) What is the power of lens A and lens B ?
(c) What is the power of combination if lenses A and B are held close together ?
Solution :

Question 29:
(a) What do you understand by the power of a lens ? Name one factor on which the power of a
lens depends.
(b) What is the unit of power of a lens ? Define the unit of power of a lens.
(c) A combination of lenses for a camera contains two converging lenses of focal lengths 20
cm and 40 cm and a diverging lens of focal length 50 cm. Find the power and focal length of
the combination.
Solution :

Question 30:
(a) Two lenses A and B have power of (i) + 2 D and (ii) – 4 D respectively. What is the nature
and focal length of each lens ?
(b) An object is placed at a distance of 100 cm from each of the above lenses A and Calculate
(i) image distance, and (ii) magnification, in each of the two cases.
Solution :



Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:263

Question 39:
The optical prescription for a pair of spectacles is :
Right eye : – 3.50 D Left eye : – 4.00 D
(a) Are these lenses thinner at the middle or at the edges ?
(b) Which lens has a greater focal length ?
(c) Which is the weaker eye ?
Solution :
(a) These lenses have negative powers and hence negative focal lengths, so they are concave
lenses.
Concave lenses are thinner in the middle.
(b) Lens of lower power has greater focal length.
So, -3.50 D lens has greater focal length.
(c) Left eye is the weaker one because it needs a lens of greater power for its correction.

Question 40:
A person got his eyes tested by an optician. The prescription for the spectacle lenses to be
made reads :
Left eye : + 2.50 D Right eye : + 2.00 D
(a) State whether these lenses are thicker in the middle or at the edges.
(b) Which lens bends the light rays more strongly ?
(c) State whether these spectacle lenses will converge light rays or diverge light rays.
Solution :
(a) These lenses have positive powers and hence positive focal lengths, so they are convex
lenses.



Convex lenses are thicker in the middle.
(b) Lens of greater power bends light rays more quickly.
So, +2.50 D lens bends light rays more quickly.
(c) These spectacle lenses will converge the light rays because these are convex lenses.



 Management Of Natural
Resources

Question 1:
Name two fossil fuels.
Solution :
Coal and Petroleum.

Question 2:
Name the major programme started to replenish forests.
Solution :
Silviculture

Question 3:
Apart from the availability of forest products, name two other things which are affected by the
destruction of forests.
Solution :
Quality of soil and sources of water.

Question 4:
Name the rivers with which the following dams are associated :
Name the rivers with which the following dams are associated :
(a) Tehri Dam
(b) Sardar Sarovar Dam
(c) Bhakra Dam
Solution :
(a) River Ganga.
(b) River Narmada.
(c) River Satluj.

Question 5:
Name two factors which can be used to find whether river water has been contaminated.

Solution :

1. The presence of coliform bacteria in rainwater.
2. Measurement of pH of rainwater.



Question 6:
Name the bacteria whose presence in water indicates the contamination with disease-causing
micro-organisms.
Solution :
Coliform bacteria.

Question 7:
With which process are the following ancient structures associated ?
Kulhs, Eris, Surangams, Kattas, Pynes
Solution :
Rainwater harvesting.

Question 8:
Which fossil fuel is conserved :Which fossil fuel is conserved :
(a) when we save on electricity ?
(b) when we use bicycle for covering short distances instead of a motorbike ?
Solution :
(a) Coal.
(b) Petroleum.

Question 9:
What is the main purpose of rainwater harvesting ?
Solution :
The main purpose of rain water harvesting is to make rainwater percolate under the ground so
as to recharge ground water.

Question 10:
What is the name of the process in which rainwater falling on the earth is stopped from
flowing and made to percolate into the ground ?
Solution :
Rainwater harvesting.

Question 11:
Name the most common practice of recharging ground water.
Solution :
Rainwater harvesting.

Question 12:
The pH of a river water sample as measured by pH paper is found to be 6. What does it tell us
about water ?
Solution :
Water is polluted with acidic wastes.

Question 13:
Name the person who is most remembered for the protection of Khejri trees in Rajasthan.
Solution :
Amrita Devi Bishnoi.



Question 14:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Chipko Andolan was associated with the conservation of wild animals such as tigers and lions.
Solution :
False.

Question 15:
Write the full names of (a) CFL, and (b) CFC.
Solution :
(a) CFL – Compact Fluorescent lamps.
(b) CFC – Chloro-fluoro carbons.

Question 16:
Choose one term from the following which include all others :
coal, natural gas, fossil fuels, petroleum
Solution :
Fossil fuels

Question 17:
Why is the process of ‘reuse’ better than that of ‘recycling’ ?Why is the process of ‘reuse’ better
than that of ‘recycling’ ?
Solution :
The process of reuse is better than recycling because more energy is used to recycle old
objects but no energy is required during reuse.

Question 18:
Name a clean gaseous fuel other than LPG and natural gas.
Solution :
Biogas.

Question 19:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) LPG is a ……………fuel but biogas is not a…………. fuel.
(b) Glaciers are a source of…………………..
(c) One of the main aim of management of forests and wildlife is to conserve
the……………….which we haveinherited.
(d) Khadin is a traditional………………………..harvesting system in Rajasthan.
(e) When a fuel burns in an insufficient supply of air, then some poisonous gas called
……………………….. is also produced.
Solution :
(a) Fossil; Fossil.
(b) Water.
(c) Bio diversity.
(d) Water.
(e) Carbon monoxide.

Lakhmir Singh Biology Class 10 Solutions Page No:259

Question 20:
What is meant by “sustainable development” ?
Solution :
Sustainable development is the development which meets the current basic human needs and



also preserves the resources for the needs of future generations.

Question 21:
What is silviculture ? What are its advantages ?
Solution :
Silviculture is a major program started to replenish depleting forests. Its advantages are:

1. It produces a large quantity of raw materials for industry (like timber and paper industry).
2. It increases the area of earth under forests (which is good for the conservation of

wildlife).
3. It maintains a perfect water cycle in nature.
4. It prevents soil erosion.
5. It prevents floods.

Question 22:
Write a short note on ‘Chipko Andolan’ (Hug the Trees Movement).
Solution :
The ‘Chipko Andolan’ (Hug the Trees Movement) originated from an incident in a remote
village called ‘Reni’ in Garhwal in the early 1970’s. A logging contractor had been allowed to cut
down trees in a forest close to a village. One day, when the men folk of the village were out for
work, the contractor’s workers came in the forest to cut down the trees. In the absence of the
men, the women of the village reached the forest quickly and clasped the tree trunks with their
arms, preventing the workers from cutting down the trees. The forest trees were thus saved.
The Chipko Movement quickly spread across all the communities and helped in the
conservation of forests.

Question 23:
Why should we conserve forests and wildlife ?
Solution :
The forests and wildlife should be conserved to prevent undue damage to the environment as
it helps in maintaining ecological balance in nature and preserves the gene pool.

Question 24:
Describe briefly the ‘khadin’ system of rainwater harvesting practised in Rajasthan.
Solution :
The ‘Khadin’ system of rainwater harvesting in Rajasthan is a very long (100 m – 300 m long)
earthen embankment called ‘Bund’ built across the lower edge of the sloping farmland. The
rainwater from the catchment area flows down the slopes and stopped by the ‘Bund’ to form a
reservoir. The rainwater which collects in the reservoir formed by the ‘Bund’, and in the well,
seeps slowly into the land (or ground). This water – saturated land is subsequently used for
growing crops.

Question 25:
What measures would you take to conserve electricity in your house ?
Solution :
The measures for conservation of electricity in our house are:

1. Switch off the lights, fans, television and other electrical appliances when not needed.
2. Use energy efficient electrical appliances to save electricity.
3. Use stairs to climb up to 3 floors of a building instead of taking a lift.

Question 26:



Although coal and petroleum are produced by the degradation of biomass, even then we need
to conserve them. Why ?
Solution :
Coal and petroleum needs to be conserved as they once get exhausted will not be available to
us in near future (because they are formed extremely slowly over a very long period of time).

Question 27:
Is water conservation necessary ? Give reasons.
Solution :
Yes, water conservation is very necessary because it meets the basic necessities for all forms
of life like human beings, animals and plants.

Question 28:
Name the products of combustion of fossil fuels like coal and petroleum products. How do
they affect us and our environment ?
Solution :
When coal and petroleum based fuels are burned, the products of combustion are: carbon
dioxide, water, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. If combustion takes place in an insufficient
supply of air then carbon monoxide is also produced.
These products are harmful to human beings and also pollute the environment in the following
ways-

1. Sulphur dioxide attacks the lungs and causes bronchitis and other diseases. It also
produces acid rain.

2. Nitrogen oxides also attacks the breathing system and causes acid rain.
3. Carbon dioxide traps sun’s heat energy falling on the earth and increases the

temperature which leads to global warming.
4.  Carbon monoxide gas is poisonous and if it gets into our blood stream, it stops the red

blood cells from carrying oxygen from lungs to the rest of the body causing suffocation
and may even cause death.

Question 29:
Why should fossil fuels like coal and petroleum be used judiciously ?
Solution :
We should use fossil fuels judiciously because:

1. Fossil fuels (Coal and petroleum) left in the earth are limited which will get exhausted
soon.

2. The products of combustion of fossil fuels pollute the environment.

Question 30:
What are the three R’s to save the environment ? Explain with one example of each.
Solution :
The three R’s to save the environment are:

1. Reduce:  Reduce means that we use less of the natural resources by cutting down on
those practices which lead to their wastage. For example – we can reduce the wastage
of electricity by switching off unnecessary lights and fans.

2. Recycle: Recycling means that we should collect the used and discarded items of paper,
plastic, glass and metals, and send them to the respective industries for making fresh
paper, plastic, glass or metal objects.

3. Reuse: Reuse means that we should use the same things again. For example plastic jars



in which we buy various food items like Jams, pickles etc, can be used later on for
storing things like salt and sugar.

Question 31:
What are the main uses of coal and petroleum products ?
Solution :
Coal is used as a fuel in homes and industries and is also used to generate electricity at
Thermal Power Plants. Petroleum products such as petrol and diesel are used as fuels in
transport to run scooters, cars, buses etc.

Question 32:
State any five steps to reduce the consumption of coal and petroleum products.
Solution :
The steps which can be taken to reduce the consumption of coal and petroleum products are:

1. Switch of the lights, fans, television and other electrical appliances to save electricity.
2. Use energy efficient electrical appliances to save electricity. This can be done by using

CFL and Fluorescent tube lights.
3. Use stairs to climb at least up to three floors of a building instead of taking a lift to save

electricity.
4. Pressure cookers should be used for cooking food to save fuels like Kerosene and LPG.
5. Solar cookers should be used to cook food whenever possible.

Question 33:
Explain why, despite good rains, we are not able to meet the demand for water of all the people
in our country.
Solution :
Despite good rains, we are not able to meet the demand for water of all people because:

1. Our population is increasing rapidly.
2. Due to lack of sufficient vegetation cover on ground, only a little rain water seeps into the

ground and get stored as ground water.
3. The high yielding varieties of crops require much more water for irrigation.
4. Discharge of untreated sewage and industrial waste into water bodies.

Question 34:
Give one example to show how the participation of local people can lead to the efficient
management of forests.
Solution :
People participation in the management of forests can help in increasing forest produce as
well as in their conservation. Participation of local people in the management of forest leads to
the revival of degraded sal forest. In 1972, the West Bengal Forest Department formulated a
novel scheme to revive the degraded sal forest by involving the local people. The forest officer
A. K. Banerjee involved the villagers of the area around the forest in the protection of 1272
hectares of degraded Sal forest. In return for help in protecting the forest, the villagers were
given employment in both silviculture and harvesting operations of the forest, 25 percent of
the final harvest produce, and were allowed to collect firewood and fodder from the forest
area on a nominal payment. With the active and willing participation of local people around the
forest, the degraded sal forest of Arabari became thick and green within ten years.

Question 35:
Explain briefly, how rainwater harvesting is done from open spaces around the buildings in city



areas.
Solution :
The rainwater harvesting from open spaces around the buildings in a city is done by
constructing percolation pits covered with concrete slabs having holes in them, and connected
to a recharge well through a pipe. The rainwater falling in the open spaces around buildings
goes into the percolation pit through the holes in its concrete slab cover. After filtration in
percolation pit, rainwater enters the recharge well through the outlet pipe and gradually seeps
into the soil.

Question 36:
(a) What is a natural resource ? Name three important natural resources.
(b) Why do we need to manage our natural resources ?
Solution :
(a) Anything in the environment which can be used by human beings is called a natural
resource. The important natural resources are forest and wild life, water and coal.
(b) We need to manage our natural resources because:

1. The resources of the earth are limited and our population is increasing day by day.
2. The proper management of natural resources takes into consideration long term

perspective and prevents their exploitation to the hilt for short term gains.
3. The proper management can ensure equitable distribution of natural resources so that

all the people can benefit from the development of these resources.
4. The proper management will take into consideration the damage caused to the

environment during the extraction or use of the natural resources and find ways and
means to minimise this damage.

Question 37:
(a) State the advantages of constructing dams across the rivers.
(b) Describe some of the problems associated with the construction of dams.
Solution :
(a) The advantages of constructing dams across the rivers are:

1. Water from a dam is used for irrigation in fields through a network of canals.
2.  Water from a dam is supplied to the people in towns and cities through pipelines after

suitable treatment.
3. The falling water from the dam is used for generating electricity.

(b) The problems associated with the construction of dams are:

1. Social Problems: Due to the constriction of high rise dams, a large number of human
settlements are submerged in the water of large reservoir formed by the dam and many
people are rendered homeless. This creates a social problem.

2. Environmental Problems: The construction of high rise dams on the rivers contributes to
deforestation and loss of biodiversity. This is because of a vast variety of flora and fauna
(plants and animals) get submerged in the water of large reservoir formed by the dam
and disturb the ecological balance.

3. Economic Problems: Some people say that the construction of high rise dams involves
the spending of huge amount of public money without the generation of proportionate
benefits.

Question 38:
(a) Name any five sources of water (other than rivers)



(b) Describe how, the water of river Ganga has been highly polluted.
Solution :
(a) The sources of water are – Lakes, Rains, Ponds, Wells and Glaciers.
(b) The river Ganga is polluted. The water of river Ganga is turned into a dirty watered rain by
the discharge of untreated sewage and industrial wastes.
The pollution of river Ganga is also caused by human activities like, Bathing, washing of
clothes, immersion of ashes of the dead and dumping of unburnt corpses into its water.
The industries also discharge effluents into the river water.

Question 39:
(a) Name the major industries which are based on forest produce.
(b) State the main aim of the management of forests and wildlife.
(c) Name the four main stakeholders in the management of forest resources.
Solution :
(a) The various industries which are based on forest produce are; timber industry, paper
manufacturing industry, ‘lac’ industry and sports equipment industry.
(b) The main aim of the management of forests and wild life is to conserve the biodiversity
which we have inherited.
(c) The main stakeholders in the management of forest resources are:

1.  The people who live in and around the forest and are dependent to some extent on
forest produce to lead their life.

2.  The Forest Department of the Government which owns the forest land and controls the
resources from the forest.

3.  The industrialists who use various forest products for their factories, such as wood for
making paper and furniture, and ‘tendu’ leaves for making ‘bidis’, etc.

4.  The forest and wildlife activists who want to see the forests in their pristine form.

Question 40:
(a) What is meant by rainwater harvesting ? Name some of the ancient structures used for
rainwater harvesting by the rural people.
(b) What are the various advantages of water stored in ground ?
Solution :
(a) Rainwater harvesting is the collection of rain water falling on land for recharging the
ground water. The structures of rain water harvesting are: Khadin, Tanks, Kulhs, Ponds, Eris,
Tals and Kattas.
(b) The various advantages of water stored in the ground are:

1. The water stored in ground does not evaporate.
2. The water stored in the ground spreads out to recharge wells and provide moisture for

crops over a wide area.
3. The water stored in ground does not promote breeding of mosquitoes.
4. The water stored in ground is protected from contamination by human and animal

wastes.
5. The water stored in ground is utilised for the benefit of local population.



 The Human Eyes And TheColorful 
World

Question 1:
What kind of lens is present in the human eye ?
Solution :
Convex lens

Question 2:
Name two parts of the eye which refract light rays (or bend light rays)
Solution :
Two parts which refract light rays are cornea and eye-lens.

Question 3:
Name the part of the eye :
(a) which controls the amount of light entering the eye.
(b) on which the image is formed.
(c) which changes the focal length of eye-lens.
Solution :
(a) Iris
(b) Retina
(c) Ciliary muscles

Question 4:
What is the name of :
(a) the curved, transparent front surface of the eye ?
(b) the light-sensitive layer in the eye ?
Solution :
(a) Cornea
(b) Retina

Question 5:

Where is the image formed in a human eye ?
Solution :
At retina

Question 6:
What is the function of the lens in the human eye ?
Solution :
Eye lens changes its shape and thickness to focus light on to the retina.



Question 7:
What job does the pupil of the eye do ?
Solution :
Pupil expands or contracts according to the intensity of light around the eye.

Question 8:
Flow does the eye adjust to take account of an increase in brightness ?
Solution :
The pupil of our eye contracts.

Question 9:
Name that part of the eye which is equivalent to the photographic film in a camera.
Solution :
Retina

Question 10:
Name the part of the retina which is insensitive to light.
Solution :
Blind spot

Question 11:
Which part of the eye contains cells which are sensitive to light ?
Solution :
Retina

Question 12:
Name two types of cells in the retina of an eye which respond to light.
Solution :
Rods and cones

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:170

Question 13:
Out of rods and cones in the retina of your eye :
(a) which detect colour ?
(b) which work in dim light ?
Solution :
(a) Cones
(b) Rods

Question 14:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
The image formed on our retina is upside-down



Solution :
True

Question 15:
What is the principal function of the eye-lens ?
Solution :
The principal function of the eye-lens is to focus light on to the retina.

Question 16:
Where does the greatest degree of refraction of light occur in the eye ?
Solution :
At cornea

Question 17:
What changes the shape of lens in the eye ?
Solution :
Ciliary muscles

Question 18:
What do the ciliary muscles do when you are focusing on a nearby object ?
Solution :
The ciliary muscles make the eyes lens thicker (more converging).

Question 19:
What is the least distance of distinct vision for a normal human eye ?
Solution :
The least distance of the distinct vision for a normal human eye is about 25cm.

Question 20:
What is the :
(a) far point of a normal human eye ?
(b) near point of a normal human eye ?
Solution :
(a) The far point of a normal human eye is at infinity.
(b) The near point of a normal human eye is at 25cm from the eye.

Question 21:
What is the range of vision of a normal human eye ?
Solution :
Range of vision of a normal human eyes is from infinity to about 25cm.

Question 22:
Name the part of our eyes which helps us to focus near and distant objects in quick
succession.
Solution :
Ciliary muscles

Question 23:
Define the term “power of accommodation” of human eye
Solution :
The ability of an eye to focus the distant objects as well as the nearby objects on the retina by
changing the focal length of its lens is called the power of accommodation.



Question 24:
Give the scientific names of the following parts of the eye :
(a) carries signals from an eye to the brain.
(b) muscles which change the shape of the eye-lens.
(c) a hole in the middle of the iris.
(d) a clear window at the front of the eye.
(e) changes shape to focus a picture on the retina.
Solution :
(a) Optic nerve
(b) Ciliary muscles
(c) Pupil
(d) Cornea
(e) Eye lens

Question 25:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Most of the refraction of light rays entering the eye occurs at the outer surface of the………….
(b) The part of eye sensitive to light is…………….
(c) The part of eye which alters the size of the pupil is………….
(d) When light is dim, the pupil becomes…………
(e) The iris controls the amount of…………… entering the eye.
(f) The ciliary muscles control the shape of the…………..
(g) To bring light from a distant object to a focus on the retina of the eye, the convex eye-lens
needs to be made……
(h) To bring light from a near object to a focus on the retina of the eye, the convex eye-lens
needs to be made……
Solution :
(a) cornea
(b) retina
(c) iris
(d) large
(e) light
(f) eye-lens
(g) thinner
(h) thicker

Question 26:
Why is a normal eye not able to see clearly the objects placed closer than 25 cm ?
Solution :
The normal eye is not able to see clearly the objects placed closer than 25 cm because all the
power of accomodation of the eye is exhausted at a distance of 25 cm. The maximum
accomodation of the eye is reached when the object is placed at 25 cm fro the eye. After this
the ciliary muscles cannot make the eye-lens more thick.

Question 27:
What changes take place in the shape of eye-lens :
(a) when the eye is focused on a near object ?
(b) when the eye is focused on a distant object ?
Solution :
(a) Eye-lens becomes thicker.
(b) Eye-lens become thinner.



Question 28:
The eyes of a person are focused

1.  on a nearby object, and
2.  on a distant object, turn by turn. In which case :

(a) the focal length of eye-lens will be the maximum ?
(b) the converging power of eye-lens will be the maximum ?
Solution :
(a) When the eye is focused on a distant object.
(b) When the eye is focused on a nearby object.

Question 29:
What change is made in the eye to enable it to focus on objects situated at different distances
? Illustrate your answer with the help of diagrams.
Solution :
To focus on distant objects, the ciliary muscles of the eye get fully relaxed and pull the
suspensory ligaments attached to the eye-lens tightly. This, in turn, stretches the eye-lens and
the eye-lens becomes thin.

To focus on nearby objects, the ciliary muscles of the eyes contract and make the suspensory
ligaments loose. The ligaments then stop pulling the eye-lens. The eye-lens bulges under its
own elasticity and becomes thick.

Question 30:
How is the amount of light entering the eye controlled ?
Solution :
The amount of light entering the eye is controlled by the iris. It automatically adjusts the size of
the pupil according to the intensity of light received by the eye. If the amount of light received
by the eye is large, then the iris contracts the pupil and reduces the amount of light entering
the eye. If the amount of light received by the eye is small, then the iris expands the pupil so
that more light may enter the eye.

Question 31:
What happens to the eye when you enter a darkened cinema hall from bright sunshine ? Give
reason for your answer.
Solution :
When we enter a darkened cinema hall from bright sunshine, at first we cannot see anything
clearly. After a short time our vision improves. This is because in bright sunshine the pupil of
our eye is small and when we just enter the darkened room very little light enters our eye due



to which we cannot see properly. After a while, when the pupil of our eye expands, more light
enters our eye and we can see clearly.

Question 32:
Why does it take some time to see objects in a dim room when you enter the room from bright
sunshine outside ?
Solution :
It takes some time to see objects in a dim room when we enter the room from bright sunshine
outside because it takes some time to the small pupil of our eye to become large so that more
light enters our eye and we can see clearly.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:271

Question 33:
A person walking in a dark corridor enters into a brightly lit room :
(a) State the effect on the pupil of the eye.
(b) How does this affect the amount of light entering the eye ?
Solution :
(a) Pupil becomes smaller.
(b) The amount of light entering the eye is reduced.

Question 34:
Ciliary muscles of human eye can contract or relax. How does it help in the normal functioning
of the eye ?
Solution :
Ciliary muscles get relaxed and the eye lens becomes thin when the eye is looking at a distant
object, and these muscles contract and make the eye-lens thick when the eye is looking at a
nearby object. Thus, ciliary muscles help in the normal functioning of the eye by changing the
thickness of the eye-lens while focussing.

Question 35:
Describe and explain, how a normal eye can see objects lying at various distances clearly.
Solution :
To focus on distant objects, the ciliary muscles of the eye get fully relaxed and pull the
suspensory ligaments attached to the eye-lens tightly. This, in turn, stretches the eye-lens and
the eye-lens becomes thin. This thin eye-lens has large focal length and small converging
power sufficient to converge the parallel rays of light coming from a distant object to form an
image on the retina.

To focus on nearby objects, the ciliary muscles of the eyes contract and make the suspensory
ligaments loose. The ligaments then stop pulling the eye-lens. The eye-lens bulges under its



own elasticity and becomes thick. This thick eye-lens has small focal length and large
converging power which converges the diverging rays coming from the nearby object to form
an image on the retina.

Question 36:
There are two types of light-sensitive cells in the human eye :
(a) Where are they found ?
(b) What is each type called ?
(c) To what is each type of cell sensitive ?
Solution :
(a) The two types of light-sensitive cells are found in the retina.
(b) They are called rods and cones.
(c) Rods are sensitive to dim light and cones are sensitive to bright light and colours.

Question 37:
What are rods and cones in the retina of an eye ? Why is our night vision relatively poor
compared to the night vision of an
owl ?
Solution :
Rods are the rod-shaped cells present in the retina of an eye which are sensitive to dim light.
Cones are the cone-shaped cells present in the retina of an eye which are sensitive to bright
light.
Our night vision is relatively poor compared to the night vision of an owl due to the presence of
relatively smaller number of rod cells in the retinas of our eyes.

Question 38:
(a) How does the convex eye-lens differ from the ordinary convex lens made of glass ?
(b) List, in order, the parts of the eye through which light passes to reach the retina.
Solution :
(a) The focal length of the convex eye-lens can be changed by the action of ciliary muscles, but
the focal length of the ordinary convex lens made of glass is fixed.
(b) Cornea, pupil, eye-lens, retina.

Question 39:
(a) What happens to the size of pupil of our eye

1.  in dim light
2.  in bright light ?

(b) Name the cells on the retina of an eye which are sensitive to



1. bright light
2. dim light
3. sensation of colour.

Solution :
(a)

1. In dim light, pupil becomes large.
2. in bright light, puoil becomes small.

(b)

1. Cones
2. Rods
3. Cones

Question 40:
(a) Draw a simple diagram of the human eye and label clearly the cornea, iris, pupil, ciliary
muscles, eye-lens, retina, optic nerve and blind spot.
(b) Describe the working of the human eye with the help of the above diagram.
(c) How does the eye adjust itself to deal with light of varying intensity ?
Solution :

(b) Working of the human eye
The light rays coming from the object kept in front of the eye enter the cornea, pass through
the pupil and fall on the eye lens. The eyes lens is convex lens, so it converges the light rays
and produces a real and inverted image of the object on the retina. The image formed on the
retina is conveyed to the brain by the optic nerve and gives rise to the sensation of vision.
(c) The eye adjusts itself to deal with ight of vaying intensity with the help of the iris. The iris
automatically adjusts the size of the pupil according to the intensity of light received by the
eye. If the intensity of light is large, then iris contracts the pupil and reduces the amount of
light entering the eye. And, if the intensity of light is small, then iris expands the pupil so that
more light may enter the eyes.

Question 41:
(a) Explain the functions of the following parts of the eye :
(a) cornea (b) iris (c) pupil (d) ciliary muscles (e) eye-lens(f) retina (g) optic nerve



(b) If you walk from a dark room into sunlight and back again into dark room, how would your
pupils alter in size ? What makes this happen ?
(c) Explain why, we cannot see our seats first when we enter a darkened cinema hall from
bright light but gradually they become visible.
Solution :
(a) a. Cornea: It is the front part of the eye. The light coming from objects enters the eye
through cornea.
b. Iris: It controls the amount of light entering the eye.
c. Pupil: It controls the illumination in the eye.
d. Ciliary muscles: The focal length of the eye-lens can be changed by changing its shape by
the action of ciliary muscles.
e. Eye-lens: It focuses light on to the retina.
f. Retina: It is a delicate membrane having a large number of light sensitive cells called ‘rods’
and ‘cones’ which respond to the intensity of light and colour of objects respectively.
g. Optic nerve: It conveyes the image formed on the retina to the brain.
(b) If we walk from a dark room into sunlight, the pupil of the eye contracts. On again entering
the dark room, the pupil of the eye expands.
(c) When we enter a darkened cinema hall from bright sunshine, at first we cannot see our
seats clearly but gradually they become visible. This is because in bright sunshine the pupil of
our eye is small and when we just enter the darkened room very little light enters our eye due
to which we cannot see properly. After a while, when the pupil of our eye expands, more light
enters our eye and we can see clearly.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:272

Question 53:
he descriptions of five kinds of images are given below :
(a) diminished and virtual
(b) enlarged and real
(c) enlarged and erect
(d) real and inverted
(e) virtual and the same size
Which one of these describes the image formed :

1. on the retina of the eye ?
2. by a magnifying glass ?
3. by a convex driving mirror on a car ?
4.  by a plane mirror ?
5. on the screen of a slide projector ?

Solution :

1. d
2. c
3. a
4. e
5. b

Question 54:
What shape are your eye-lenses :
(a) when you look at your hand ?
(b) when you look at a distant tree ?



Solution :
(a) Thick
(b) Thin

Question 55:
Suggest how your irises help to protect the retinas of your eyes from damage by bright light.
Solution :
Irises help to protect the retinas of our eyes from damage by bright light by adjusting the size
of the pupil according to the intensity of light received by the eye.

Question 56:
(a) Which parts of the eye cause rays of light to converge on the retina ?
(b) Which part causes the greatest convergence ?
(c) Which part brings the image into sharp focus on the retina ? How does it do this ?
Solution :
(a) Cornea and eye-lens
(b) Cornea
(c) Eye lens
By changing its thickness and hence conversing power.

Question 57:
An object is moved closer to an eye. What changes must take place in the eye in order to keep
the image in sharp focus ?
Solution :
Ciliary muscles should change the shape of eyes-lens to make it thicker and increase its
converging power.

Question 58:
Why does the eye-lens not have to do all the work of converging incoming light rays ?
Solution :
The eye-lens does not have to do all the work of converging incoming light rays because
cornea of the eye also converges light rays entering the eye.

Question 59:
Explain why, when it is getting dark at night, it is impossible to make out the colour of cars on
the road.
Solution :
The color detecting cells of the retina of the eye called ‘cones’ do not work well in dim light.

Question 60:
Nocturnal animals (animals which sleep during the day and come out at night) tend to have
wide pupils and lot of rods in their retinas. Suggest reasons for this.
Solution :
Wide pupils allow more light to enter the eye during night.
Rod cells in the retina are sensitive to dim light and hence help in seeing properly at night.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:279

Question 1:
Name one of the common defects of vision and the type of lens used to remove it.
Solution :
Defect: Myopia; Corrected by using concave lens.



Question 2:
Name the defect of vision in a person :
(a) whose near point is more than 25 cm away.
(b) whose far point is less than infinity
Solution :
(a) Hypermetropia
(b) Myopia

Question 3:
Which defect of vision can be rectified :
(a) by using a concave lens ?
(b) by using a convex lens ?
Solution :
(a) Myopia
(b) Hypermetropia

Question 4:
What type of lens is used to correct
(a) hypermetropia
(b) myopia ?
Solution :
(a) Convex lens
(b) Concave lens

Question 5:
What is the other name for
(a) myopia (b) hypermetropia ?
Solution :
(a) Near Sightedness
(b) Far Sightedness

Question 6:
What is the scientific name of
(a) short-sightedness, and
(b) long-sightedness ?
Solution :
(a) Myopia
(b) Hypermetropia

Question 7:
What kind of lens is used to correct (a) short-sightedness (b) long-sightedness ?
Solution :
(a) Concave lens
(b) Convex lens

Question 8:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Short-sightedness can be cured by using a concave lens.
Solution :
True

Question 9:



Name the defect of vision in which the eye-lens loses its power of accommodation due to old
age.
Solution :
Presbyopia

Question 10:
Name the defect of vision which makes the eye-lens cloudy resulting in blurred vision.
Solution :
Cataract

Question 11:
What is the other name of old age hypermetropia ?
Solution :
Presbyopia

Question 12:
Name any two defects of vision which can be corrected by using spectacles.
Solution :
(a) Myopia
(b) Hypermetropia

Question 13:
Name one defect of vision (or eye) which cannot be corrected by any type of spectacle lenses.
Solution :
Cataract

Question 14:
Name the body part with which the terms myopia and hypermetropia are connected.
Solution :
Eye

Question 15:
What is the far point of a person suffering from myopia (or short-sightedness) ?
Solution :
Less than infinity.

Question 16:
Where is the near point of a person suffering from hypermetropia (or long-sightedness) ?
Solution :
The near point of a person suffering from hypermetropia is farther away from the normal near
point (25 cm).

Question 17:
Your friend can read a book perfectly well but cannot read the writing on blackboard unless
she sits on the front row in class.
(a) Is she short-sighted or long-sighted ?
(b) What type of lenses-converging or diverging-would an optician prescribe for her ?
Solution :
(a) Short-sighted
(b) Diverging lenses

Question 18:



A man can read the number of a distant bus clearly but he finds difficulty in reading a book.A
man can read the number of a distant bus clearly but he finds difficulty in reading a book.
(a) From which defect of the eye is he suffering ?
(b) What type of spectacle lens should he use to correct the defect ?
Solution :
(a) Hypermetropia (Long Sightedness)
(b) Convex lens

Question 19:
A student sitting in the last row of the class-room is not able to read clearly the writing on the
blackboard.
(a) Name the type of defect he is suffering from.
(b) How can this defect by corrected ?
Solution :
(a) Myopia (Short – Sightedness)
(b) Concave lens

Question 20:
Complete the following sentences :
(a) A short-sighted person cannot see ……….. objects clearly. Short-sightedness can be
corrected by using
……… lenses.
(b) A long-sighted person cannot see…………. objects clearly. Long-sightedness can be
corrected by using
………. lenses.
Solution :
(a) distant, concave
(b) nearby, convex

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:280

Question 21:
What are the two most common defects of vision (or defects of eye) ? How are they corrected
?
Solution :
The two most common defects of vision are myopia and hypermetropia. Myopia can be
corrected by using a concave lens and hypermetropia can be corrected by using a convex lens.

Question 22:
Differentiate between myopia and hypermetropia. What type of spectacles should be worn by
a person having the defects of myopia as well as hypermetropia ? How does it help ?
Solution :
In myopia, a person can see nearby objects clearly but cannot see distant object clearly. In
hypermetropia, a person can see distant objects clearly but cannot see nearby objects clearly.
A person having the defects of myopia as well as hypermetropia should wear spectacles
having bifocal lenses in which upper part consists of concave lens and lower part consists of
convex lens.
The upper part corrects myopia and the lower part corrects hypermetropia.

Question 23:
Name the defect of vision which can be corrected by a converging lens. Show dearly by a ray
diagram how the lens corrects the defect.



Solution :
Hypermetropia can be corrected by a converging lens.
Correction of hypermetropia is given in the following diagram:

Question 24:
Name the defect of vision which can be corrected by a diverging lens. Show clearly by a ray
diagram how the lens corrects the defect.
Solution :
Myopia can be corrected by a diverging lens.
Correction of myopia is given in the following diagram:



Question 25:
Explain with the help of labelled ray diagram, the defect of vision called myopia and how it is
corrected by a lens.
Solution :
Myopia or short sightedness is that defect of vision due to which a person cannot see the
distance objects clearly (though he can see the nearby objects clearly). This eye defect can be
corrected by using a concave lens.
Myopic eye and its correction is given in the following diagrams



Question 26:
Explain with the help of labelled ray-diagram, the defect of vision called hypermetropia, and
how it is corrected by a lens.
Solution :
Hypermetropia (or long-sightedness) is that defect of vision due to which a person cannot see
the nearby objects clearly (though he can see the distant object clearly). This eye defect can be
corrected by using a convex lens.
Hypermetropic eye and its correction is given in the following diagrams:



Question 27:
A person suffering from the eye-defect myopia (short-sightedness) can see clearly only up to a
distance of 2 metres. What is the nature and power of lens required to rectify this defect ?
Solution :

Question 28:
The near-point of a person suffering from hypermetropia is at 50 cm from his eye. What is the
nature and power of the lens needed to correct this defect ? (Assume that the near-point of the
normal eye is 25 cm).
Solution :



Question 29:
A person needs a lens of power, – 5.5 dioptres for correcting his distant vision. For correcting
his near vision, he needs a lens of power, +1.5 dioptres. What is the focal length of the lens
required for correcting

1. distant vision, and
2. near vision ?

Solution :

1.  For distant vision:
P = -5.5D
P = 1/f
f = 1/P = 1/(-5.5) = -0.1818 m = -18.18cm

2. For Near Vision:
P = 1.5D
P = 1/f
f = 1/P = 1/1.5 = 0.6666 = 66.66 cm

Question 30:
What is presbyopia ? Write two causes of this defect. Name the type of lens which can be
used to correct presbyopia.
Solution :
Presbyopia is that defect of vision due to which an old person cannot see the nearby objects
clearly due to loss of power of accommodation of the eye.
Causes: Gradual weakening of the ciliary muscles and diminishing flexibility of the eye lens.
It can be corrected by using convex lenses.

Question 31:
When is a person said to have developed cataract in his eye ? How is the vision of a person
having cataract restored ?
Solution :
A person is said to have developed cataract when the eye lens becomes progressively cloudy
resulting in blurred vision.
The vision of a person having cataract can be restored after getting surgery done on the eye
having cataract. The opaque lens is removed from the eye by surgical operation and a new
artificial lens is inserted in its place.

Question 32:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
A person is short-sighted if his eyeball is too……………. Spectacles with a………… lens are needed.



A person
is long-sighted if his eyeball is too……………. Spectacles with a …………. lens are needed. These
focus light
rays exactly on to the………..
Solution :
long, concave, short, convex, retina

Question 33:
(a) What is short-sightedness ? State the two causes of short-sightedness (or myopia). With
the help of ray
diagrams, show :

1. the eye-defect short-sightedness.
2. correction of short-sightedness by using a lens.

(b) A person having short-sight cannot see objects clearly beyond a distance of 1.5 m. What
would be the nature and power of the corrective lens to restore proper vision ?
Solution :
(a) Short Sightedness is that defect of vision due to which a person can see nearby objects
clearly but cannot see distant objects clearly.
Causes:
1. Excessive curvature of the eye lens
2. Elongation of the eyeball
Ray diagram for:
(i) eye-defect short sightedness



Question 34:
(a) What is long-sightedness ? State the two causes of long-sightedness (or hypermetropia).
With the help of ray diagrams, show :

1. the eye-defect long-sightedness.
2. correction of long-sightedness by using a lens.

(b) An eye has a near point distance of 0.75 m. What sort of lens in spectacles would be
needed to reduce the near point distance to 0.25 m ? Also calculate the power of lens required.
Is this eye long-sighted or short ​sighted ?
(c) An eye has a far point of 2 m. What type of lens in spectacles would be needed to increase
the far point to infinity ? Also calculate the power of lens required. Is this eye long-sighted or
short-sighted ?
Solution :
(a) Long-sightedness is that defect of vision due to which a person cannot see the nearby
objects clearly but he can see the distant objects clearly.
Causes:
1. Focal length of the eye lens is too long.
2. The eyeball has become too small.
Ray diagram for:
(i) eye-defect long-sightedness

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:281

Question 47:
In a certain murder investigation, it was important to discover whether the victim was long-
sighted or short-sighted. How could a detective decide by examining his spectacles ?
Solution :
If the spectacle lenses are convex, the person was long sighted and if the spectacle lenses are
concave, the person was short sighted.

Question 48:
The picture given here shows a person wearing ‘half-moon’ spectacles. What sort of eye-
defect do you think he has ? Why are these particular spectacles useful to him ?
Solution :
Half moon spectacles are used for reading. so, the person has long-sightedness.
These particular spectacles are useful to him since the convex lenses of spectacles form the
image of nearby object (like a book in hand) at the near point of his eye.

Question 49:



A short-sighted person has a near point of 15 cm and a far point of 40 cm.
(a) Can he see clearly an object at a distance of:
(i) 5 cm ? (ii) 25 cm ? (iii) 50 cm ?
(b) To see clearly an object at infinity, what kind of spectacle lenses does he need ?
Solution :
(a) (i) No, (ii) Yes, (iii) No
(b) Concave lenses

Question 50:
The near point of a long-sighted person is 50 cm from the eye.The near point of a long-sighted
person is 50 cm from the eye.
(a) Can she see clearly an object at :
(i) a distance of 20 cm ?
(ii) at infinity ?
(b) To read a book held at a distance of 25 cm, will she need converging or diverging spectacle
lenses ?
Solution :
(a) (i) No, (ii) Yes
(b) Converging lenses

Question 51:
A person can read a book clearly only if he holds it at an arm’s length from him. Name the
defect of vision :
(a) if the person is an old man
(b) if the person is a young man
Solution :
(a) Presbyopia
(b) Hypermetropia

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:282

Question 1:
How much is our field of view :
(a) with one eye open ?
(b) with both eyes open ?
Solution :
(a) About 150o
(b) About 180o

Question 2:
Which of the following have a wider field of view ?
(a) Animals having two eyes on the opposite sides of their head.
(b) Animals having two eyes at the front of their head.
Solution :
Animals having two eyes on the opposite sides of their head.

Question 3:
Out of animals of prey and predators, which have their eyes :

1.  at the front of their head ?
2. on the opposite sides of their head ?



Solution :

1. Predators
2. Animals of prey

Question 4:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
Rabbit has eyes which look sideways.
Solution :
True

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:284

Question 5:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
(a) Having two eyes gives a…………. field of view.
(b) Having two eyes enables us to judge………….. more accurately.
Solution :
(a) wider
(b) distances

Question 6:
What are the advantages of having two eyes instead of just one ?
Solution :
Following are the advantages of having two eyes instead of one:
1. Having two eyes gives a wider field of view.
2. Having two eyes enables us to judge distances more accurately.

Question 7:
Explain clearly why, a person who has lost the sight of one eye is at a disadvantage compared
with the normal person who has two good eyes.
Solution :
A person who has lost the sight of one eye has a narrower field of view than the normal person
who has two good eyes. Also, the person with one eye cannot judge distances accurately.

Question 8:
Name two animals having eyes :
(a) on the sides of the head.
(b) at the front of the head.
Solution :
(a) Rabbit, deer
(b) Tiger, lion

Question 9:
Among animals, the predators (like lions) have their eyes facing forward at the front of their
heads, whereas the animals of prey (like rabbit) usually have eyes at the sides of their head.
Why is this so ?
Solution :
The predators (like lions) have their eyes facing forward at the front of their heads, whereas the
animals of prey (like rabbit) usually have eyes at the sides of their head so that they can see
their enemies (predators) in a very large area around them and try to escape from them.



Question 10:
Five persons A, B, C, D and E have diabetes, leukaemia, asthma, meningitis and hepatitis,
respectively.
(a) Which of these persons can donate eyes ?
(b) Which of these persons cannot donate eyes ?
Solution :
(a) A and C
(b) B, D and E

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:288

Question 1:
As light rays pass from air into a glass prism, are they refracted towards or away from the
normal ?
Solution :
Towards the normal

Question 2:
As light rays emerge from a glass prism into air, are they refracted towards or away from the
normal ?
Solution :
Away from the normal

Question 3:
Name a natural phenomenon which is caused by the dispersion of sunlight in the sky.
Solution :
Rainbow

Question 4:
What information do we get about sunlight from the formation of a rainbow ?
Solution :
Sunlight consists of seven colours.

Question 5:
What did Newton demonstrate by his experiments with the prism ?
Solution :
Newton demonstrated by his experiments with the prisms that white light consists of a
mixture of seven colours.

Question 6:
What colours make up white light ?
Solution :
Seven colours – Violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, red

Question 7:
Give the meaning of the term VIBGYOR. With which phenomenon is it connected ?
Solution :
The seven colours of the spectrum of white light are denited by the word VIBGYOR where V
stands for Violet, I for Indigo, B for Blue, G for Green, Y for Yellow, O for Orange and R for Red.
It is connected with the phenomenon of dispersion of light.

Question 8:



In the formation of spectrum of white light by a prism :

1.  which colour is deviated least ?
2.  which colour is deviated most ?

Solution :

1. Red
2. Violet

Question 9:
What colours lie on the two sides of the ‘green colour’ in the spectrum of white light ?
Solution :
Yellow and Blue

Question 10:
Name the scientist who discovered that sunlight consists of seven colours.
Solution :
Newton

Question 11:
What is the order of colours in a rainbow, from the outside to the inside ?
Solution :
Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo and Violet

Question 12:
Which colour of the spectrum has (a) longest wavelength, and (b) shortest wavelength ?
Solution :
(a) Red
(b) Violet

Question 13:
Which light has the longer wavelength : red light or blue light ?
Solution :
Red Light

Question 14:
Which colour of light has the shorter wavelength – red or violet ?
Solution :
Violet

Question 15:
Fill in the blanks with suitable words :
(a) When a ray of light enters a prism, it bends…………. ..the normal; as it leaves the prism, it
bends…………..
the normal.
(b) White light is composed of…………I The colour of white light deviated through the largest
angle by
a prism is………..
Solution :
(a) towards, away from
(b) seven, violet



Question 16:

1.  A ray of white light breaks up into its components while passing through a glass prism.
Draw a ray diagram to show the path of rays.

2. Mark the least deviated colour in your diagram.
3. Why do different coloured rays deviate differently in a prism ?

Solution :

3. Different coloured rays deviate differently in a prism because different colours travel at
different speeds through the glass prism.

Question 17:
(a) What happens when a ray of ordinary light is passed through a triangular glass prism ?
(b) What will happen if another similar glass prism is placed upside down behind the first
prism ?
Solution :
(a) When a ray of ordinary light is passed through a triangular glass prism, it splits to form a
band of seven colours.
(b) If another similar glass prism is placed upside down behind the first prism, then the seven
coloured rays from the first prism which are incident on the second prism recombine to form
the original white beam.

Question 18:
When a beam of white light is passed through a prism, it splits to form lights of seven colours.
Is it possible to recombine the lights of seven colours to obtain the white light again ? Explain
your answer.
Solution :
Yes, it is possible to recombine the lights of seven colours to obtain the white light again by
placing another similar prism alongside the first one in the inverted position as shown below.
The first prism disperses the white light into seven coloured rays. the second prism receives
all the seven coloured rays from the first prism and recombines them into original white light.
This is because the refration produced by the second prism is equal and opposite to that
produced by the first prism.

Question 19:
(a) What is spectrum ? What is the name of glass shape used to produce a spectrum ?
(b) How many colours are there in a full spectrum of white light ? Write the various colours of
spectrum in the order, starting with red.
Solution :
(a) The band of seven colours formed on a white screen, when a beam of white light is passed
through a glass prism is called spectrum of white light. A glass prism is used to produce a
spectrum.
(b) There are seven colours in the spectrum of white light. The colours are Red, Orange, Yellow,
Green, Blue, Indigo and Violet.



Question 20:
What is meant by dispersion of white light ? Describe the formation of rainbow in the sky with
the help of a diagram.
Solution :

Question 21:
In the figure given alongside, a narrow beam of white light is shown to pass through a
triangular glass prism. After passing through the prism, it produces a spectrum YX on the
screen.
(a)State the colour seen (i) at X, and (ii) at Y.

(b) Why do different colours of white light bend through different angles with respect to the
incident beam of light ?
Solution :
(a) (i) violet (ii) Red
(b) Different colours of white light bend through different angles because different colours
travel through different speeds through in the glass prism.

Question 22:
Draw a diagram to show how white light can be dispersed into a spectrum by using a glass
prism. Mark the various colours of the spectrum.
Solution :

Question 23:
Make two diagrams to explain refraction and dispersion.
Solution :



Question 24:
Describe how you could demonstrate that white light is composed of a number of colours.
Solution :
We will allow a beam of white light to pass through a glass prism. The white light splits to
form a band of seven colours. This shows that white light is composed of seven colours.

Question 25:
How could you show that the colours of the spectrum combine to give white light ?
Solution :
Colours of a spectrum from one prism are allowed to fall on a similar prism placed adjacent to
the first prism, but in inverted position. The refraction produced by second prism is equal and
opposite to that produced by the first prism. This makes the colours of the spectrum combine
to give white light.

Question 26:
Which is refracted most by a prism : red light or violet light ? Explain why ?
Solution :
Violet light is refracted the most because violet colour has the minimum speed in glass prism.

Question 27:
(a)Draw a diagram to show the refraction of light through a glass prism. On this diagram, mark

1.  incident ray
2. emergent ray, and
3.  angle of deviation.

(b) What is a rainbow ? What are the two conditions necessary for the formation of a rainbow
in the sky ?
(c) What acts as tiny prisms in the formation of a rainbow ?



(d) Name the process which is involved in the formation of a rainbow.
(e) What are the seven colours seen in a rainbow ?
Solution :

(b) Rainbow is an arch of seven colours visible in the sky which is produced by the dispersion
of sun’s light by raindrops in the atmosphere. A rainbow is formed in the sky when the sun is
shining and it is raining at the same time.
(c) Raindrops
(d) Dispersion of light
(e) Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo and Violet.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:290

Question 38:
Why do you not see a spectrum of colours when light passes through a flat pane of glass ?
Solution :
Because a flat pane of glass has parallel sides.

Question 39:
Name some everyday objects :
(a) which reflect all the colours in sunlight
(b) which absorb all the colours in sunlight
Solution :
(a) White Paper
(b) Blackboard

Question 40:
Where in nature can you find evidence that white sunlight may be made of different colours ?
Solution :
Formation of the rainbow in the sky

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:292

Question 1:
Name the phenomenon which causes the twinkling of stars.
Solution :
Atmospheric refraction of light

Question 2:
Name two effects produced by the atmospheric refraction.
Solution :
Twinkling of stars; Advance sunrise and delayed sunset



Question 3:
Which phenomenon makes us see the sun :
(a) a few minutes before actual sunrise ?
(b) a few minutes after actual sunset ?
Solution :
(a) Atmospheric refraction of sunlight
(b) Atmospheric refraction of sunlight

Question 4:
Atmospheric refraction causes advance sunrise and delayed sunset. By how much time is :
(a) sunrise advanced ?
(b) sunset delayed ?
Solution :
(a) About 2 minutes
(b) About 2 minutes

Question 5:
State whether the following statement is true or false :
The planets twinkle at night due to atmospheric refraction of light.
Solution :
False

Question 6:
Name the phenomenon due to which the stars seem higher in the sky than they actually are.
Solution :
Atmospheric refraction of light

Question 7:
Fill in the following blanks with suitable words :
We can see the sun about……….. minutes before the actual sunrise and about…………. minutes
after the actual
sunset because of atmospheric…………..
Solution :
two, two, refraction

Question 8:
Why do stars seem higher than they actually are ? Illustrate your answer with the help of a
diagram.
Solution :
Stars seem higher than they actually are because of atmospheric refraction of light coming
from the star while passing through the successive denser layers of earth’s atmosphere.

Question 9:
Explain why, the sun can be seen about two minutes before actual sunrise. Draw a diagram to
illustrate your answer.
Solution :
The sun can be seen about two minutes before actual sunrise because of atmospheric
refraction of sun’s light as shown in the following diagram. When the sun is slightly below the
horizon, then the sun’s light coming from less dense air to more dense air is refracred
downwards as it passes through the atmosphere and the appears to be raised above the
horizon.



Question 10:
Explain why, if we look at objects through the hot air over a fire, the objects appear to be
moving (or shaking) slightly.
Solution :
The air just above the fire becomes hotter. This hotter air is optically rarer but the colder air
further up is optically denser, so when we see the objects by the light coming from them
through hot and cold air layers having different optical densities, then refraction of light takes
place randomly due to which the objects appear to be moving slightly.

Question 11:
(a) What is atmospheric refraction ? What causes atmospheric refraction ?
(b) Why do stars twinkle on a clear night ?
(c) Explain why, the planets do not twinkle at night.
Solution :
(a) The refraction of light caused by the earth’s atmosphere is called atmospheric refraction. It
is caused due to the varying optical densities of different layers of earth’s atmosphere.
(b) The light coming from a star undergoes atmospheric refraction due to varying optical
densities of air at various altitudes. The continuously changing atmosphere refracts the light
from the star by different amounts from one moment to the next. Thus, the star-light reaching
our eyes increases and decreases continuously and the star appears to twinkle.
(c) Planets appear to be quite big to us and can be considered to be a collection of a very large
number of point sources of light. The dimming effect produced by some of the point sources
is nullified by brighter effect produced by some other point sources. Thus, the overall
brightness remains the same and the planets do not appear to twinkle.

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:293

Question 20:
We know that light refracts (or bends) when it goes from one medium to another. Now, the
atmosphere contains only air. Then how does light get refracted on passing through only air in
the atmosphere ?
Solution :
The atmosphere only contains air but all the air in the atmosphere is not at the same
temperature. Some of the air layers are cold whereas others are comparatively warm. The
cooler air layers of the atmosphere behave as optically denser medium for the light rays
whereas the warmer air layers behave as optically rarer medium. So, light gets refracted on
passing through these layers of air in the atmosphere.

Question 21:
By how much time the day would have been shorter if the earth had no atmosphere ?
Solution :
By about 4 minutes

Question 22:
A student claims that because of atmospheric refraction, the sun can be seen after it has set,
and the day is, therefore, longer than if the earth had no atmosphere.
(a) What does the student mean by saying that the sun can be seen after it has set ?
(b) Do you think that the students’ conclusion is correct ?
Solution :
(a) This means that due to atmospheruc refraction we continue to see the sun about two
minutes after the actual sunset. No such atmospheric refraction could have been possible if
the earth had no atmosphere. Hence, the day is longer due to the atmosphere of earth.



(b) Yes

Lakhmir Singh Physics Class 10 Solutions Page No:297

Question 1:
What is the colour of the sunlight :
(a) scattered by the dust particles in the atmosphere ?
(b) scattered by the air molecules in the atmosphere ?
Solution :
(a) White
(b) Blue

Question 2:
Which of the two is scattered more easily : light of shorter wavelengths or light of longer
wavelengths ?
Solution :
Light of shorter wavelengths

Question 3:
State whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) The scattering away of red light makes the sky appear blue during the day time.
(b) The scattering away of blue light makes the sun appear red at sunset.
Solution :
(a) False
(b) True

Question 4:
What colour does the sky appear to an astronaut ?
Solution :
Dark or black

Question 5:
Which effect is illustrated by the observation that when a beam of sunlight enters a dusty
room, then its
path becomes visible to us.
Solution :
Tyndall effect

Question 6:
State two effects produced by the scattering of light by the atmosphere.
Solution :
Two effects produced by the scattering of light by the atmosphere are:
-Sky appears blue.
-Sun appears red at sunrise and sunset.

Question 7:
What is tyndall effect ? Explain with an example
Solution :
The scattering of light by particles in its path is called Tyndall effect.
Ex. When a beam of sunlight enters a dusty room through a window, then its path becomes
visible to us due to the scattering of the light by the dust particles present in the air.



Question 8:
What happens when a beam of sunlight enters a dusty room through a window ? Explain your
answer.
Solution :.
When a beam of sunlight enters a dusty room through a window, then its path become visible
to us. The tiny dust particles present in the air of room scatter the beam of light all around the
room.

Question 9:
Why does the sky appear blue on a clear day ?
Solution :
The sky appears blue on a clear day because of the scattering of blue component of white
sunlight by air molecules presents in the atmosphere. When sunlight passes through the
atmosphere, most of the longer wavelength lights do not get scattered much and hence pass
straight through the atmosphere. The shorter wavelength blue light is, however, scattered all
around the sky and whichever direction we look, some of this scattered blue light enters our
eyes.

Question 10:
Why does the sky appear dark (or black) to an astronaut instead of blue ?
Solution :
To an astronaut, the sky looks dark and black instead of blue because there is no atmosphere
containing air in the outer space to scatter sunlight. So, there is no scattered light to reach our
eyes in outer space, therefore the sky looks dark and black there.

Question 11:
Why does the sun appear red at sunrise ?
Solution :
The sun and the surrounding sky appear red at sunrise because at that time most of the blue
color present in sunlight has been scattered out and away from our line of sight, leaving
behind mainly red color in the direct sunlight beam that reaches our eyes.

Question 12:
Why does the sun appear red at sunset ?
Solution :
The sun and the surrounding sky appear red at sunset because at that time most of the blue
color present in sunlight has been scattered out and away from our line of sight, leaving
behind mainly red color in the direct sunlight beam that reaches our eyes.

Question 13:
Why are the ‘danger signal’ lights red in colour ?
Solution :
‘Danger’ signls are red in colour because the red coloured light having longer wavelength is the
least scattered by fog or smoke particles. Due to this the red light can be seen in the same
colour even from a distance.

Question 14:
(a) Draw a neat and labelled diagram of the experimental set up for observing the scattering of
light in a colloidal solution of sulphur to show how the sky appears blue, and the sun appears
red at sunrise and sunset.
(b) Out of blue light and red light, which one is scattered more easily ?
(c) Which component of sunlight is scattered away when the sun appears red at sunrise or



sunset ?
(d) What causes the scattering of blue component of sunlight in the atmosphere ?
Solution :

Question 20:
In an experiment to study the scattering of light by passing a beam of white light through a
colloidal solution of sulphur in a transparent glass tank :
(a) Which colour is observed from the front of the glass tank ? Does this colour   correspond to
the   colour of
sky on a clear day or the colour of sky around the sun at sunset ?
(b) Which colour is observed from the sides of the glass tank ? Does this colour   correspond
to the   colour of
sky on a clear day or the colour of sky around the sun at sunset ?
Solution :
(a) Red colour is observed from the front of the glass tank. This colour corresponds to the
colour of sky around the sun at sunset.
(b) Blue colour is observed from the sides of the glass tank. This colour corresponds to the
colour of sky on a clear day.

Question 21:
Explain why, when the sun is overhead at noon, it appears white, but when the same sun is
near the horizon at sunset, it appears red.
Solution :
When the sun is overhead, then the light coming from the sun has to travel a relativity shorter
distance through the atmosphere to reach us. During the shorter journey of sunlight, only a
little of the blue color of the white light is scattered. Since light coming from the overhead sun
has almost all its component colors in the right proportion, therefore the sun in the sky
overhead appears white to us.
But when the same sun is near the horizon at sunset, the sunlight has to travel the greatest
distance through the atmophere to reach us. During this long journey of sunlight, most of the
shorter wavelength blue colour present in it is scattered out and away from our line of sight.
So, the light reaching us directly from the setting sun consists mainly of longer wavelength red
colour due to which the sun appears red.



Question 22:
Complete the following statements :
When the sun is setting, the light from it has to travel a ……………… thickness of the earth’s
atmosphere and
only…….. wavelength……… light is able to reach us. Sunset is therefore……….
Solution :
greater; longer; red; red